Something about
you.
Welcome back everyone.
We are gonna start with our first submitter today on the
online casino gambling bill,
and I understand the Fitzroy
Bowling Club by Zoom.
Just
Good morning.
Good morning, Dean. Thanks for joining us.
Yep, no worries. Thank you.
We've got, um, a copy of your written submission
and we've got 10 minutes to hear from
you today, so over to you.
Okay, thank you. Yeah, well,
I'm here representing Fitzroy Bowling Club, um, that club.
Um, we've we're a club with um, a hundred
or just over a hundred full-time members, about 30 casuals
and another 70 or 80 social business house bowlers.
So sort of 200 odd people playing for us.
Um, very reliant on community funding, um, assist us
with things like greens cost, um, admin gear
and machinery purchases, repairs and maintenance.
Our overall operation of the club costs us about 50 KA year
to keep our greens operating.
So, um, a significant part of our costing Currently with,
um, applications for funding, we get about 45
to 50% successful.
Um, a figure that's steadily becoming harder and harder.
So, you know, getting about half of our money from funding,
um, excuse me, we are concerned that any changes
to gaming legislation will effectively make the pot smaller
and make it less claims will be successful.
So going from where we used to be around 85% down to 50 now,
and who knows after that?
So we're really concerned about that.
Um, membership levels
or membership fees are at a level
that we don't feel we can increase them
to pick up that slack.
Um, we feel we've reached the, reached the limit
to keep operating and other income
streams are less than in the past.
So things like, um, bar revenue is,
is significantly down just with the change
of drinking habits and, um, legislation around that.
Um, so, you know, we're well aware of that.
Um, without gaming funding, our club would simply struggle
to operate and certainly at the level it does.
We've been around for 125 years or just coming up 125 years.
So it would be a real shame
to see something like our organization struggle to a point
where it, um, potentially fails to, to carry on.
Um, we feel we're a, a vital part of the community,
and not only for bowlers,
but also just as a, a recreational facility.
We have a lot of functions there at some,
which is a another way to try and get income,
but, um, yeah, if we failed to operate, we would,
we would certainly leave a big hole in the community.
Um, that pretty much sums up my submission.
Fantastic. Thank you so much.
I'll just check if we've got your questions, Andy Foster,
But thank you very much for that.
Um, just clarify, um, you said 85% down to 50%.
I wasn't quite sure what you meant by that.
Did that mean, was that your success rate in terms of
Correct, yes.
So, so several years ago when we're applying for funding,
you'd, you'd get from, you know, nz cts and the likes.
We'd get about 85% success.
Now we are looking more around the 50%.
And do you have any comment on why you think that is?
Um, is it just that they've got less money to distribute and
Diminishing pot? Yeah,
totally. Um, from,
from the feedback we are getting less available.
Yeah. Okay. No, thank you.
Thank you. Uh,
I'll just check if we've got any further questions.
We don't seem to have any. Thank you
for your written submission and for joining us today, Dean,
and, um, best wishes for the future
and thanks for joining us this morning. Thanks, Dean.
Thank you. Thank you.
Bye. Thank you.
Now I've got our nexter, which is the Special
Olympics Otago Trust, also joining us by Zoom.
Sorry, it's Kim Kale here.
Were you expecting to hear from me now?
Uh, yes, we are. Kim. Yes.
Sorry, we're running a, a few, couple minutes early.
Are you okay to do your submission now?
I absolutely am. Thank you.
Fantastic. Um, we, we can't see you,
but are you welcome to, to do your submission
with the camera off, if you wish.
Uh, uh, there we go. How's that?
Uh, great. There we go. We can see you.
I'm at work. I'm at work. Thank you.
Fantastic. Thank you. Well, thank you for being at work.
Um, so early for the submission.
The, uh, we've got your written submission
and we've got 10 minutes to hear from you,
so over to you. Okay,
Thank you. Um,
so thank you for the opportunity to present.
Um, I know that there's a couple of other clubs
around New Zealand from Special Olympics
that are presenting as well.
Um, when in our submission we did provide the sort
of information that we serve a population
of 132,000 in the Otago area.
Um, and currently we have 115 athletes.
We did see a significant drop off through COVID, um,
as a lot of sporting bodies did.
Um, but we've, um, been building up quite nicely again, um,
more recently and finally starting to get some younger,
uh, athletes in.
Um, it's a real struggle for our athletes, um, noting
that about 17%
of people living in New Zealand households have, um,
disability according to the, uh,
household disability survey in 2023.
And a portion of those, of course,
have intellectual disability.
Um, from the perspective of intellectual disability, we know
that, um, a lot of those people have, uh, problems
with overweight and obesity
and, um, that is, uh,
26% in the general population,
but it's about 51% in the people
with intellectual disability population.
Part of that is, um, their challenges in getting work, um,
their emotional and mental, uh, issues that they have
to deal with, um,
but also the access to, um, sporting opportunities.
It's really, really difficult for our people
to get into sport without good support.
And that sort of moves me on to the, the coaches
and the volunteers that, um, make all
of this happen at a local level.
It takes, um, they say it takes a village to raise a child,
it takes a village plus to raise someone
with a intellectual disability
and, um, support them in various ways through the community.
Um, and what we are finding is
that our parents are getting older.
Um, I hope to retire in the next couple of years.
So I am one of those parents. I'm a volunteer.
I work on the Otago committee.
Um, we are actively involved in fundraising, um,
but just as the previous person spoke to,
we are finding it more
and more difficult to get funds, um, available.
So, uh, again, you know,
a few years ago we would've had most
of our funding applications, uh, successful.
We are finding now that we're probably one in three, uh,
that are successful, we're having
to work harder for those as well.
Um, which, you know, is, is fine,
but, um, we are all volunteers
that are supporting these people keeping
active in the community.
The benefits of sport, of course, are the, the, um,
emotional resilience, the, um, social inclusion
assist in cognitive development, um, and the moral
and social cost of not being able
to provide this is potentially significant.
I know from my son's perspective, um, it would make it, uh,
significantly more difficult, um, to, uh, provide,
um, sport.
And I'm just, I can't, I have to take the opportunity
to share my screen, I think.
Can I share my screen? Yep. We'll just get that. No, I can't
Permission for you. Yep.
Should be able to. We'll just see if that's
Host disabled it. So
yeah, I'll just go. Okay,
Good now Good. Should
be good now.
Okay. So, um, I suppose for me, I just want
to show you the why. Can you see that?
Yeah, we can.
Okay. So this is our rego athletes at our last regional
games, and, um, as you can see, this is something
that's really important for them.
Um, this is, um,
I'm involved in a number of sports,
but power lifting is one of those.
And this young man here is my son who's 28 years old.
Um, but these are, are some of our athletes.
We've got, um, more than this,
but this was at the last, um, national games
and this is my son, as you can see, he's pretty strong.
Um, but this is my why
and this is why keeping these people in sport
is just so important.
And, um, special Olympics, we,
we just couldn't do without it.
So thank you.
Oh, well thank you so much for sharing that with us.
I mean, you must be a very proud mother
and your son is very lucky to have you, um,
make this commitment to his life.
So thank you very much for doing that. I'll just
check for any questions.
No, that's very, very clear. No questions. Thank you.
No, thank you so much for joining us today,
Kim. We really appreciate it. Thank
You for the opportunity. Appreciate
it. Thanks for
Sharing your, um, personal
story as well. We appreciate that.
Thank you. You not
here, but last before New Zealand.
Oh, fantastic. Shall we get Yeah,
welcome.
Thank you. Thank you for joining us in person
and thank you for, um, uh,
doing your submission a little bit earlier.
We've got a copy of your written submission here.
We've got 10 minutes to hear from you, obviously.
Thank you. Um, marina,
and thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Uh, my name's Belinda Edwards.
I'm the acting Chief executive for Basketball New Zealand.
I'm here representing a sport that is not only one
of the fastest growing sports in New Zealand, um,
but also one of the most impactful
and inclusive for for our young people.
Um, we at Basketball New Zealand support the intent on
of the bill, um,
and the, uh, intent to regulate online gambling, um,
and provide transparency for a currently unregulated,
um, space.
Uh, but we are deeply concerned that the bill, uh, doesn't
or as drafted, uh, fails to uphold a foundational principle
of New Zealand's gambling framework
that gambling profits must benefit the community.
Um, basketball New Zealand supports
35 regional associations.
Uh, we have over a hundred
thousand structured participants in our, um,
grassroots programs.
And in 2024 alone, our community, um, providers
of our sport received, uh,
just under 9 million in trust funding through,
um, class four gambling.
So this funding is not a luxury, it's, it's essential
to continue the growth, um, of our sport.
Uh, the Ministry of Internal Affairs has stated
that this legislation will have no material impact on class
four revenues, but the evidence says otherwise.
And I know that Martin Sneered in, um, presented on Monday
and has provided you with a report, uh,
with compelling e evidence to, um, support that
that is not the case.
Um, some of the findings in that, um, show
that class four grants are already declining in real terms
between 2018 and 2023.
Funding to the sports sector decreased
by 14% after inflation.
Um, and a real drop of 153 million Department
of Internal Affairs own GA gaming machine profits report
shows a re uh, 23% reduction, um,
between 2021 and March, 2025.
The New Zealand Institute of Economic Research estimates
that regulation of online gambling could reduce annual class
four grants to community sport by 43 million
and overall community grants by 80 million per year.
Uh, TAB shows that 85%
of their betting is now done online
and 15% through retail Lotto New Zealand, um,
have had online sales grow from 10%
to 46% in the last decade.
So it's not speculation, it's it's a trend lotto, sorry, 10
to, oh, was that 46 you said?
Yeah, so thanks. Um, the bill as it stands,
gives licensed online casino operators a free pass
to benefit from New Zealanders
but not give back to the community.
So we urge the committee, um, to act decisively
and amend the bill to embed the principle
that gambling should benefit the community.
Introduce a mandatory community funding levy on licensed
online casino operators, ring Fe portion of this levy
for community sport and re recreation
and establish a transparent
and accountable distribution mechanism.
Basketball is more than a sport, it's a vehicle
for inclusion, wellbeing and youth development.
We see the impact
of community funding every day on our courts and our schools
and in the lives of our young people.
If this bill goes ahead without that funding mechanism,
it puts all of that at risk.
Um, so we ask you to protect the future of community sport,
um, by introducing changes to this legislation.
And thank you for your time and
and consideration of our submission and,
and listening to me today.
Thank you so much. Thank you for joining us in person.
I'll just check to see, um, do you questions?
I had a, um, just a question.
Thank you for going through the relative, um,
changes in funding.
'cause that has actually been a question
that we've been quite interested in.
I think one of the aspects of this bill that,
that has been possibly concerning is the trend over time.
Mm. And um, would you say that's because of, um,
or in any way linked to the move to,
or from people from in person gambling
to online?
Or is there anything that you can say
around about that connection?
Yeah, I think, um,
currently the unregulated online gambling space,
I certainly know from, um, the kids that I talk to, my own,
my own kids, a lot of their mates are doing that.
Um, so I do think there is a general trend to
what is currently an unregulated space, um, online,
which is why we're really pro regulating this space.
However, we, we wanna see that, um, you know,
money is coming back to the community.
But yeah, I think, um, the reduction in funding,
I think there's also more community organizations
and sports organization wanting, uh,
a slice of, of that funding.
Um, commercial revenue is reducing government revenue
for sports is reducing.
So overall, um, there's a significant impact
to our sports and recreation.
Just kind of follow up to that.
So basketball you said is emerging
as a much more popular sport.
Yes. And maybe traditionally as a, um,
because it's becoming more
and more popular, do you think that the
decrease in funding is gonna affect the ability of people
to participate in basketball moving forward?
Just as kind of a, you know, not one of our netball
and rugby traditional? Yeah.
Yeah, I think it will. I think, uh, you know,
people are already paying to play our sport
and, uh, the class ball gambling certainly helps
that to some level.
But if that continues to reduce, our only option is
to charge participants more.
Um, and you know, we all know that
that will just mean there are some kids
and some families that can't afford it.
So absolutely the, the numbers will reduce.
We also have other, um, impacts that we play indoors.
So, um, hiring venues in the last three years, uh,
not all, but most of those venues, the price that we pay
for those venues has doubled.
Um, and those are often council owned
or private owned facilities and we have no option
but to apply for classical gambling to try
and reduce those costs.
So we're getting hit from all angles at the moment,
and this is certainly not, not another one
that we would want to, to come our way.
Well, thank you for the work that you do.
My, my daughter's really enjoyed picking
up basketball last couple.
Oh, great. So yeah, it's a really great,
um, great sport. So,
Well, the tall blacks are playing here on the
1st of December, so make sure you get your
tickets, bring kids along. I
Have to let her know. Thank you
so much for going. Okay. Very. Thank you.
Thank you.
Not suspend, right? So we'll suspend until when?
When were they due? Give
Call ninth.
Okay, so, we'll, so what should we just, um, suspend
until nine 15?
Just 'cause the 8 55 1 should
have probably been here already, right?
What do you think? Yeah, thank you. Thank you.
Yep.
Good morning. Morning. Cool.
Good morning. Welcome.
We've got, um, 10 minutes to hear from you.
We, we can't actually see you.
Uh, but uh, if you, if you wanted
to turn on your, here we go.
Hi Dave. Thank you. Thank you very much for joining us.
We've got a copy of your Russian submission
and we do have 10 minutes set aside to hear from you today.
So, um, over to you.
So, um, I, I don't have too much more to add to
what I've said, but, um, uh, we,
we are a Browns Bay Rackers Club, so we offer tennis
and squash to, um, about 530 members.
And we also have a number of, uh, local players that come
and play and just do it on a pay as you go basis
so they can book, they free to book courts, uh, pay online
and use our facilities.
So we have, um, several hundred people sort
of using our courts all the time.
Um, so we believe it's quite a good community
set up for the local Brown Bay community and,
and further afield, we've got people from to Bay
and North Cross and all over as members.
Um, so we, um,
we were hit quite badly during the 2013 floods
and have a lot of that was covered, uh, during,
by insurance, but a lot of it wasn't.
So we are not in a great financial shape
and, uh, luckily we've been supported by, um, local boards
and charities to spend money
to recover from the situation we are in.
So we rely very heavily on funding
and I think we always will rely on funding to keep the co
to keep the club viable and keep improving it
and making it better for all local people to use.
So we'll be very upset to, um, to lose any of
that funding that we rely on.
Thank you so much, Dave.
Uh, I was just checking to see if the,
my colleagues have any questions for you?
No, no, I think that's, that's very clear. Thank you.
Thank you so much for, um, joining us today.
We really appreciate it.
Uh, and we wish you the best with your, um, endeavors
with the, with the racket club. Thank you.
Thank you. Okay, bye-bye. Bye
Bye.
Okay, and we've got, we've got Raywin is it?
Yes, it is. Welcome, Wyn.
Thank you. We, we can't see you,
but we can, um, see that your, your video may be turned off.
I've turned it on so I'm not sure
That That's fine. We're
happy to, um, just hear from you.
Oh, there we go. Welcome everyone. Nice to see you.
Thank you. We've got a copy of your written submission
and we do have 10 minutes set aside
for your oral submission today.
So over to you. Thank you.
Thank you very much, um, for time to talk to you today.
Um, online gambling is already impacting
land-based gambling revenues.
Um, we have, uh,
well we have about 1500 people playing from our junior
grades through to our premier.
Um, by far the bulk
of our membership is in our junior grades with around seven
to 800 people or children having fun
playing softball over the summer.
Um, over the last three years we've applied
for over 300,000 annually in funding on average,
as we've submitted,
we only receive about 200,000 in funding.
Um, so funding's already on the decline, especially
with councils, not relicensing new, some new owners
of current held, um, gaming machines,
um, and some license holders that would like more
'cause they haven't got the maximum
not being able to do that.
So we're already finding
that funding is is harder and harder to get.
Um, if online gambling was not required
to give back a reasonable portion of their profits
to the community, sports like softball would become out
of reach for most people in New Zealand because of the cost.
Our local clubs also rely on funding
and they're already showing signs of struggling with funding
not being as available as it has been in recent years.
Um, you know, we are volunteer based so you know,
we as well as, um, you know,
in the office we have paid staff,
which we rely on funding to pay there.
Otherwise the fees, um, that we'd need
to charge our clubs would be an awful lot higher if we had
to cover those salaries as well.
Um, so yeah, basically we're sort of saying that at least
between 15 80% should be returned
of profits should be returned back, um,
from those online gaming areas at the moment, you know,
a hundred percent goes offshore.
Um, so, you know, we'd like to see a good portion
of it come back into the community and not just sport,
but other communities that, um, funding helps,
which I'm sure you've heard a lot
about from a lot of people.
So any questions from you guys?
You, I'll just check with my colleagues. Oh, good.
No, we've got no questions. That was really clear.
Thank you so much Roan,
and thank you for joining us a bit earlier.
Appreciate, uh, having you with us today. Thank
You's all. Great. Thank you very much.
Thank you so much.
Thanks. Oh, fantastic.
Richard, welcome. Good morning.
Morning, David, Benjamin.
Morning. Very good, thank you.
Now we've got you all written so much.
I believe we've got two actually, um, from you. Oh,
Probably. I do.
Thank you very much for that.
Um, you can take those as read
and, uh, we've got 10 minutes to hear from you.
So, um, I was the short one. Yeah.
First one was slightly, oh,
Well, sorry, I didn't know I was, uh,
overseas when I was summoned to, uh,
provide, provide evidence.
Fantastic. So, uh, I apologize for
Any of that. No, no, that's
perfect. Um,
and quite usual for us to have, um, an initial one
and a supplementary, so no problem there at all.
Yeah, I've got 10 minutes to hear from you, so over to you.
And if you want, you can leave time
for some questions. Yeah,
Sure. So, well, thank you very
much initially
for inviting us along.
I think this is a, uh, I think
the funding of sport in New Zealand has
had many watershed moments, but this may be one of them.
I think that, uh, whilst
one might not agree with the fact
that sports clubs are funded out of the gambling habits
of people who should potentially be looking at spending
their money in other, in other ways,
not being a gambler myself, um, I've always,
I've always struggled with that, uh, way in which
sport is funded, but
however, I think that it's money well spent.
Uh, we need to do whatever we can, uh,
as a community to encourage the young, the youth of,
uh, our community.
Uh, Tara is one of the largest communities in Wellington.
Um, and we need to do whatever we can to
encourage people to play more sport
and spend less time on social media and
Gambling. Gambling.
Yeah.
And, um, I think that it's
all the benefits we all know about what those are.
Um, and I operate a retail business myself.
I certainly know the impact of online, uh,
the online retail has had to bricks and mortar businesses.
And I am disappointed
and surprised that we want to make
gambling easier by making it a smoother
process to offer gambling, uh,
from online and overseas.
Uh, I don't, I know that in my industry
that it's been made difficult for consumers
to purchase product from overseas sites.
Um, and I find it surprising that we are
going down a path of enabling gamblers to be able
to source their fix from overseas.
I accept that gambling, uh, methods
of gambling has changed over the years and that, um, more
and more operators are seeing that they are trying
to do the right thing by limiting the amount of gambling
that is done in house, uh,
where machines aren't getting replaced.
And my club has already recognized that it's getting more
and more difficult to, uh, attract funding.
Uh, as operators, uh, become more and more limited, more
and more nationalized.
The pot is shrinking every year.
We do quite well out funding.
Um, but I was looking at our profit and loss
and even though last last year we got approximately 60,000,
I think 60 $200,000 from, uh, from funding,
we still lost $22,000.
We have a healthy balance sheet in the sense that we try
and retain earnings and we try
and keep sunny for that rainy day.
We find budgeting on an annual
for anything longer than an annual basis, very difficult
'cause we cannot budget for funding.
Funding could get turned off tomorrow for any,
for any particular reason.
Um, and it is really the lifeblood of sport
and our community at AWA with our football club that the,
the, the funding just eases those pressures on us
to increase fees to try
and run our club as sustainably
and as efficiently as possible.
Nobody at our club gets paid to play nobody at our club.
Our club gets paid outside the two administrative positions
and two coaches.
Um, we have insurance costs to pay.
We have ever increasing overheads.
Our national body puts ever increasing regulations
and demands on us to reach certain standards,
which all come at a cost.
We have to produce programs, we have
to attract qualified coaches, we have to put on programs
to get coaches qualified.
We have to run things like drug testing rooms.
We have to provide health and safety
and all of those components that go towards it.
We are encouraged if we want to progress
to provide seated standing areas.
Um, and the, the costs of
running sport, let alone, uh,
covering those costs to break even
without funding would be impossible.
Um, I have a very, very good committee, uh,
and we're, we're a highly functioning unit.
Uh, I have people who willingly give up their time
and effort to put time into volunteering to keep the,
to keep the club rooms going.
Uh, and I'm very proud of that club.
But having limited ever more limited access
to funding would make community sport
or put community sport in a very precarious position.
And I would encourage all of their elected mps to,
uh, push back on this proposed, um, legislation.
I dunno what the answer is further down the
line for funding sport.
But like I said, I struggle with it consciously about
sport taking money from gambling.
However, until somebody can recommend another,
another revenue stream, it is as good as it gets.
Um, and yet having, giving people more
and more access to, to gambling whilst not
seeming to charge them
or impose a community-based kickback
seems a bit strange to me.
But I'm not, I must admit I'm not fully up to speed
with the, the proposed legislation.
All I know is the sort of the, the guts of the, the guts
of the matter that it's gonna impact community sport
and the funding streams that we so desperately rely on.
So thank you.
I see in your written submission,
you've haven't increased your fees since No.
2021. No.
Is that something that you would need
to look at, do you think in the Oh
Oh, most certainly.
Most certainly. We are stuck between, we have,
uh, western suburbs up the road with the Olay Academy.
We have North Wellington down the road with Alex Moore Park.
Both o operate, they have, they have rev
outside revenue streams
'cause they have access to their turf.
They've given prior to prior access
to their turf facilities, which enable them
to run programs which generate revenue tarawa until Grenada
and North Hallelujah comes along at some later stage,
maybe in the next two years,
we are limited into the programs
that we can put on this year.
The weather was kibo a lot of the, um,
high performance programs that we want to go on
because all the parents think that their sons lot sons
and daughters are Lion or messy or Emily Longrun and,
and that they want their, their kids
to be coached at the high to the highest possible level
'cause they're gonna go on and play Premier League football.
And whilst we are unable to offer those,
those high performance programs due to our lack of assets
in terms of at turf access, we just
target being a very good community football club and try
and retain the talent that we'd have available to
by running a good community facility.
And we feel that we just can't justify, especially with
where thing's gone on since COVID and, and one thing
and another, uh, and we do try and push back.
I I I have a business that operates in the UK and I looking
after a football club in the uk, the football club
that I look after in the uk, Leatherhead in Surrey,
they play 42 games a season league games.
They operate in about six cup competitions,
so it's about 48 games if they get knocked out
of every cup game cup in the first round.
My first team at Tarawa plays 18 games.
And that I struggle with, you know, it, the season is
so short, and yet I think
that people are paying 310 for between three in the,
in the area between 300 and $400.
There are people clubs
who are running a high performance program,
which is just basically an opportunity to take more money
from parents to try
and fund those bigger programs that they offer
as they get bigger as clubs.
And we feel that we've hit a ceiling at 300.
Our, our our membership encourag in, uh, sorry,
enlarges increases every year.
Proportionately. We're up to about
four hundred and ten, four hundred fifty junior paying
members at the moment, but we've got a thousand up there
and a thousand up there.
So despite being a bigger suburb than both of those places,
I suppose we, um, we are a much smaller entity, so we try
and keep our costs a fit.
Well, thank you so much. I think we're almost at time now.
Yeah. Unless there's any quick questions
I can talk for Africa. I, I,
I, I recognize every one of those issues.
You have played tar many, many times.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Yeah. Well thank you for everything that you do
and thanks for coming in today. Appreciate
The opportunity. Thank
You. Thank you so much. Thank you.
Thank
You.
Okay. I'm just, would you be able to just, um,
I just wanna set up the zoom.
Oh, okay. I need to mute.
Yeah, I know, but I
go, we've got the y me old boys, uh,
rugby football club there.
If you could just accept the invitation to join
as a panelist and then we can start your submission.
Thank you.
Cool. They joining now. Fantastic.
We've got Charlene.
Yes, that's right. Good morning. Welcome.
Thank you for joining us.
Uh, we've got a copy of your written submission
and we've got 10 minutes set aside
for your oral submission today.
So you're welcome to use as much of that time
as you wish. Uh, so over to you.
Thank you. Um, so as you're aware, my name is Sha
and I am the club manager
of the Yme Old Boys Rugby Club in Nelson.
Um, we are one of the largest rugby clubs in Nelson,
and we also have one of the largest network clubs
and we have our own touch module as well.
Um, I've been part of the club for three years now,
and grant funding for us, um, is critical to
what we provide to our community without it, um,
I could actually see our club, um,
being non-existent within a few years.
Excuse me. Um, we rely heavily on it for
every aspect as such from, um, equipment, uniforms,
right up to maintaining our club rooms.
Uh, we're one of the only, uh,
we've probably got the largest club room
for rugby in Nelson, um, in terms
of a rugby club.
Um, and when I came on board three years ago now, um,
it needed a lot of TRC
and maintenance, um, so that we had to apply for a lot
of grant funding to get it up to scratch.
As such, there are new regulations as well,
which are impacting us, um, in terms of financial pressures.
So for example, um,
our local district council have just increased our building
war and a fitness, which now needs
to be checked every six months rather than 12 months.
So that's another financial pressure on the club.
Um, really simple things that people often don't realize
that we have to, um, pay for
and make sure we budget for, like lighting our fields, um,
electricity bills, water bills,
it's almost like owning a home, but for our club rooms.
So all of these things, um, it's really, really important
that we have grant funding for.
Otherwise we just, we'd have to increase our, um,
members fees.
And right now with our financial, you know,
like the community, everybody's struggling financially.
And so for us, we actually try
and work really hard to keep our fees as low as possible.
Um, within the time that I've been part of the club,
we've worked on reducing fees for our juniors
because we really wanna take away the financial barriers.
Um, we've done this through fundraising, um,
and holding events at our club rooms.
However, if we were to lose our grant funding
to cover the bigger costs as such, um,
then we'd have to increase the fees.
And I believe from what I've seen from our community
and numbers and kids in sports
and adults in sports, if we continue to increase fees,
it's just gonna gonna become another financial barrier
that our community just can't, um, handle at the moment.
Um, we also, so we have two, well,
two admin staff, so myself and one other,
and we, um, so we heavily rely on grant funding
for our wages.
Um, without that I, I don't believe
that we have the volunteer base to take up the roles
that the two of us, um, currently do.
Um, we did come from a volunteer committee
and we still have that committee, but now that myself
and our accounts, um, staff member are part
of the club, it means
that our committee can focus on the grassroots rugby
and our community netball
and not have to worry about the operational side of the club
as well and financing it.
Um, we're also,
because we understand
that grant funding is decreasing every year
and it's getting harder and harder to, um,
to be granted it as such, we are trying
to look at other avenues of revenue.
However, to be able to do this,
we initially need grant funding to get us up and running.
So as an example, um, we're currently looking at
what other facilities we can add to our, um, to our space
so that possibly we can be using, for example,
AstroTurf courts that we can hire out to the public
and to other, um, users.
So we are trying to become more self-sufficient so
that we are not heavily rely, uh,
relying on other sources of income.
Um, but right now that's just not a possibility for us.
Um, sponsorship is down, grant funding is down.
We're reducing our fees as much as we can,
however the costs, uh, increasing.
So mathematically that doesn't work out.
If the grant, grant funding continues to decrease
or disappear, then I believe our board believes
and our committee believes
that our club will be non-existent in the future.
Um, yeah, that's it from me. Any questions? So
Much. Thank you for,
um, that, that explanation for us and, and,
and sorry to hear about those, uh, concerns.
I'll just check with colleagues if they've got a question.
We've got one from Andy Foster.
Thanks Charlene. Um, thanks for all the work you do.
Um, just can you just tell us a little bit about the, um,
the finances of the company
and at the company, the, um, the club in terms of, um, uh,
if you, if you lost that sort of 90
to a hundred thousand dollars or a large chunk of that,
that money that you're currently getting
Mm-hmm. Does
The club more than break even at the moment?
Or is it, you know, that puts you in a
Yeah, no, so we break even at the moment.
Yeah. Um, it's very hard to budget annually
because we rely heavily on our grant funding.
So, um, because the grant funding we use as much
as we possibly can in wages.
That would be our biggest expense
as a club when it comes to grant funding.
Um, so in terms of having a budget,
if it's really, really hard to say yes, we're going to get,
you know, 60,000 to cover our part-time staff.
Um, if that wasn't the case, then in terms of the budget,
we'd have to pull it from other areas.
Um, and so we are lucky at the moment. We do break even.
Um, but as I say, sponsorship's down
Down pretty much it's pretty close run thing.
Uh, absolutely. Yeah.
And, and look, second question.
You mentioned earlier in your, um, uh, in speaking
that the council has increased the
frequency of the building war and fitness.
They explained why they've done that.
No, uh, we've purely just got, um, an update
to say that it's now six monthly rather than annually.
Okay. Thank you so much. Thank you so much, Charlene.
We really appreciate it. It's like
a beautiful day wherever you are.
Yes. Yep. Sunny Nelson.
Amazing. Beautiful. Always sunny down Nelson. Yeah.
Amazing. Thank you so much. Thank
You. Take care.
Do you want
break till 9 55?
Uh, isn't it 9 45?
Uh, but then you'll be 10 minutes out again.
Sorry. So the, um, so as we, are we still online now?
So we've now got the Northern United Hockey Club
incorporated for joining us in person.
We've received a copy of your written submission
and we've got 10 minutes set aside for your oral submission.
So you're welcome to use as much time as that as you like.
Um, and thank you for bearing with us with our site
Today. You,
thank you. Thank you very much.
Madam Chair, members of committee, thank you very much for,
um, hearing us here today.
My name is Lee Patton
and I appear with Nicole Health on behalf
of the Northern United Hockey Club.
Nicole is our club chair
and I am a member of our management committee.
Uh, Nicole has asked me to support her with this submission,
uh, today because of my previous comp career experience, um,
at internal affairs and gambling and racing policy
and regulation, um, and my master's research into remote
and interactive gambling and the regulation of it, um,
we have, uh, um,
obviously reiterating our points from our submission
that we believe regulated online casino gambling activity
be required to provide revenue to community activities
and particular sport.
Uh, and we'd just like to quickly outline today what we see
as the potential impact on our club
of this build as it stands.
Um, and although we're reflecting our own club experience,
we believe that this reflects the experience
and views of many grassroots amateur sports
clubs around the country.
Um, for context, Northern United is a, uh,
hockey club established in 1930.
We have a hundred and about 150 active playing members
across junior and senior grades in Wellington.
We have our, our, our first elevens, top premier grade teams
through to our more kind of active social grade teams.
We encourage participation in sport at all levels.
Uh, and we are very committed to
providing a diverse
and inclusive club that provides not just hockey
opportunities, but social, uh, and social
and community activities as well.
Our members range between the ages of seven and 70
and we encourage them all to interact.
Um, so we're getting that cross generational
interaction as well.
We, like many clubs around the country,
derive a significant portion of our revenue from Class
four gambling grant funding.
It represents about a third of our income.
Uh, and this is used largely
to cover fees required to run the sport.
Um, and this is mostly maintenance
and replacements of the turf fields that we utilize.
We fully depend on volunteers to manage the club, um,
and our membership subscriptions
to keep the club financially viable.
We are concerned about the impact
of regulated online ga casino gambling, uh,
and what that would have on grant funding available from
class four gambling operators.
Uh, and we support the submission
and evidence that I believe has already been
provided by the Community Sport Collective.
In that regard, we are committed
to diversifying our, our revenue sources.
Um, but the, the truth is that sponsorship opportunities
for grassroots sports and clubs like ours
are fewer and smaller.
And that class four gambling funding does give us that sort
of financial base to, uh, consider
and take more risks around events
and other activities to help generate
additional revenue streams.
Um, without that gambling funding,
our fees would increase, would need
to be increased significantly to cover operating costs
with already a relatively
expensive sport compared to others.
Um, I think our current fees
for an an adult player are at $430 a season.
Um, and we, we do focus on,
um, subsidizing
or reducing the fees
for other younger players, students, et cetera.
Um, and so
that they can participate in our club and our teams.
Um, we estimated b we'd need to increase those fees
by about 50%, if not more, if we were, uh, to lose
that class four gambling funding.
And this cost, we believe would be significantly prohibitive
for many of our club members.
It's already quite stretch for people, um,
especially in a cost of living crisis.
And, um, and we acutely aware of the,
uh, you know, of where people spend their money
and making sure that we're providing
really good value for people.
Um, an alternative if we did lose their funding
is to cut our costs.
And, uh, this would probably mean be cutting our junior
program, um, our school kids programs
because we do make an effort to subsidize
to encourage participation at that level.
Um, alternatively it would mean reducing those sort
of training opportunities that we provide to our players,
um, which again would, uh, erode their experience, um,
and prohibit that sort of development pathway
that we like to promote.
Um, our club's position is
that if we see an increase in regulated gambling activities,
then it should provide a direct community benefit or return.
Um, I note that there is advice from officials
regarding the perverse incentives
that using gambling funding
to fund community activities does provide acknowledge that.
But this is the basis for
our gambling policy in New Zealand.
Um, the, the, the TAB was a direct response to, you know,
uh, the illegal bookmakers
and the gambling that was going on, on on course.
Um, and the decision there to set up the, the,
as a mechanism to ensure that the funding from
that activity was returned back to the, the clubs
that ran race meetings.
Um, when even, even looking at our, our gambling policy,
even the justification
to introduce casinos in the first place in New Zealand was
really, um, based on
and promoted not just on the economic value,
but on the social value that they offered.
Um, they, uh, marketed
and as entertainment venue venues,
it's more than just going to play the machines.
Um, they're places where you go for a good night out
with your friends, um,
but you can see this bill, um,
putting the casino in everybody's pocket
and that is an inherently antisocial activity.
So, um, without that return to the community, um, then
we feel that the future of grassroots sports
clubs like Northern United is active, inclusive,
and supportive community groups is preened.
Um, and we would strongly lend our voice to
the submissions recommending that this is required
of any permitted regulated
online casino gambling operations.
Thank you so much, um, Lee and Nicole.
Um, questions and yeah,
Look, thanks Lee.
I got you.
Obviously bought in, bought to be some of your, uh,
background experience then.
Um, just, I mean, some people would say, we don't,
we don't wanna have online gambling at all.
And look, we know it's there, we know it's growing.
Um, can you, you know,
give us your insights when you gave us the TAB bit
and said, well, you know, that was there,
the cost was already gambling.
Um, it just was unregulated.
It just your insights into, um, people's propensity
to gamble and whether that's
something that they will always do.
We've seen quite a lot of people saying they don't like
gambling being a source, but, you know,
are people always gonna do that?
It's just a matter of how we regulate it, manage it, and try
and reduce the harm from it.
That's that.
It is a a a particular question that I might go
to defer to officials to provide you with advice on that,
but, 'cause it's quite broaden in its scope,
but, um, the, uh, people will, people do gamble
and it's accepted and I think our, our, we've got a range
of views within our club about, um, about gambling
and online gambling and, and, um, participation in that.
Um, we, we've uh, we have,
um, coalesced around this bureau that it needs
to be supportive of community activities.
We recognize that it does happen
and that part of it is channeling it into the right places
that support, um, the community
and social outcomes that we're looking for.
Thank you.
Thank you. We have used up our, our time.
So thank you so much, uh, both of you
for joining us today and for your submission.
And thanks for, um, accommodating us
with our trip delay today
As well. Thank you very much. Thank you so
Much.
So we now have the gaming trust joining us by Zoom.
I understand.
Yes. Good morning. Uh, you able to hear me?
Yes. Welcome. Um, Campbell, we don't, we can't see you,
but we can hear you, so I don't know if you want,
Oh, sorry. There
you go. That's better.
Oh, yes. Yeah, there you go. We've got you there.
Thank you so much for, for joining us.
We have received your written submission, so you can take
that as read and we've got 10 minutes today for your
oral submission over to you.
Yeah, good morning and thank you
for the opportunity to speak with you today.
Uh, my name is, you know, is Keber Wilson.
I'm the National Operations Manager
of the LT R Gaming Trust.
I've held a management, uh, role
with the trust for over 21 years.
Our chief executive Karen Shay is currently overseas
and she's asked me to present on behalf
of the organization, uh, the present.
The presentation is an expansion
of most relevant matters covered in our,
uh, written submission.
I'll have a bit of a scratching through for the last couple
of days, so hopefully I don't cough
and spotter too much throughout.
Um, to begin with, I'd like to touch on the controls
of unlicensed uh, operators.
A GT notes that the bill's primary deterrent against
unlicensed gambling operators are financial penalties.
Excuse me. We propose that a more robust
and preventative approach would be
to leverage banking systems controls
to block financial transactions to
and from unlicensed operators.
This method equal
to mechanisms used in counter-terrorism financing
legislation would effectively restrict access
to New Zealand's gambling market by unlicensed entities.
Those controls would reduce the need
for reactive enforcement
and investigative resources, offering a proactive solution
to market integrity.
Sorry, struggle.
It's that time of the year, I think.
Yeah, just came on yesterday.
Um, I'll now address the value of class war gambling
and the threat posed by online gambling.
As you were aware, class war gambling is often scrutinized
due to its association with gambling harm.
However, those of us working in the sector understand the
significant and tangible benefits it delivers
to communities across New Zealand in a private capacity.
I'm the treasurer of parago, uh, that is an organization
that provides supporting opportunities
for people living with a disability.
I know firsthand how vital class four funding is
to our operations.
Without it, our ability to support our members would be
severely diminished and there is a real possibility the
organization wouldn't exist at all.
While many others will speak
to the broader community benefits or class four gambling.
I'll keep my comments on that aspect. Brief for the record.
Class four gambling generates approximately
1 billion annually.
Of this 15% is paid in GST and 20% in gaming duty.
Around 40%, approximately three $70 million is distributed
to the community, uh, across New Zealand.
Sorry. Yeah, community groups.
Cross country online gambling presents a significant
and growing threat to this model.
As more players shift from traditional venues
to online platforms, the financial viability
of community groups and venue operators is at risk.
This could lead to financial hardship for grant recipients,
local hotels, taverns
and clubs, causing a reduction in services and closure.
Now I've listened a few of the earlier, um,
presentations and that's quite evident.
Um, there would be a ripple effect impacting businesses
to support those organizations and entities.
This is not a desirable outcome for our communities.
It is impossible to accurately determine the amount
of amount New Zealands currently spend annually.
Gambling online estimates range from 300 million to
above 500 million,
and once legalized, this figure could easily
exceed $1 billion.
The online casino gambling bill is based on the premise
that the link, uh, between class four gambling
and community funding creates a perverse outcome.
As a result, the bill proposes a fully commercial model,
however, that premise is flawed.
Data shows that gambling expenditure
has declined in real terms.
While demand for community funding continues to grow
the proposed model risks dismantling the system
that delivers substantial public benefit, we would like
to present an alternative model.
One that mitigates the risk post online gambling preserves
the pot and potentially increases community benefit
and allows Class four operators to evolve
with the digital age.
Every other sector of the economy has embraced
online platforms.
There is no compelling reason why class
four gambling should be excluded.
We recommend that Class four operators be permitted
to enter joint benches with online platform providers,
operate online gambling in both private and public settings,
and continue to support community funding
through both land-based and online channels.
We believe something close to a 50 50 joint venture model
after tax would be commercially viable
and ensure that community interests are protected.
And public venues, uh, online gambling could be facilitated
through simple touchscreen devices.
Eliminate, eliminating the need
for traditional gaming machines.
This would lower operating costs and allow both land-based
and online gambling to coexist
and contribute to the community to community outcomes.
That model would provide government
with all the benefits offered under the proposed model,
including tax revenue, operator integrity,
and harm minimization controls,
while also preserving the critical benefits currently
afforded to the not pro not-for-profit
and hospitality sectors.
I've discussed this model with the New Zealand chief
executive or the major gaming manufacturer
who confirmed its conceptual soundness while acknowledging
the political challenges.
But if there is political will to introduce online gambling,
there should also be the will
to retain the community benefits
currently supported by gambling.
The current proposal effectively excludes Glass four
operators from participating in the future of gambling
that's akin to banning local retailers from selling online,
while allowing only offshore giants like Amazon
or Ali Express to operate in New Zealand.
Such regime would never be accepted in any other sector.
So why is gambling being treated differently?
This committee is making a critical decision.
I urge you to consider the long-term
consequences of this legislation.
A GT is very willing to work with parties
to develop practical methods for community distributions
to work using or adapting the current model
and existing processes.
I live in Dunedin where we've struggled for years
to secure funding for a new hospital estimated
to cost $1.8 billion.
Meanwhile, this bill could see over a billion dollars
annually flow offshore.
Let's keep that money here supporting our communities,
building hospitals and funding essential services.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Uh,
we really appreciate your submission and your,
and your detailed, um, oral submission as well.
I do have some questions from members. I'll start with Andy
Foster. Yeah, look, thanks Cam.
Um, two parts of the question.
First one of them is, just to clarify,
you said currently the estimate is about 300 $500 billion,
which is BET online, or which is lost online?
Uh, that's lost online. That's
Lost online. Okay.
Right. Okay.
Um, and look, the other part is just in terms
of giving licenses or
or awarding licenses to cl uh,
existing Class four operators, you know, whether it's
with JVs or or otherwise.
How does that work in terms of, we've, we've got a lot of o
of, um, all existing, um, international operators, um,
who are operating in either a gray
or completely unregulated way.
How do we keep a lot of those out if
we are too domestic?
Is there a risk of that? You know, if, you know,
what I'm I'm saying is if, if too many of our, um,
licenses are issued to, to just New Zealand based entities,
although they could be New Zealand based with a,
an offshore provider as well, you know, a mixture of ways.
So just interested in your thoughts on that.
Well, that's where I think the banking, uh,
control mechanism comes into play.
If similar to counter-terrorism, uh, finance legislation,
if the banks don't permit deposits to be transacted
with non-licensed operators, overseas operators, uh,
they can't get the money same as terrorism.
Um, to me that seems a practical answer.
Okay. So it doesn't matter. It doesn't matter.
The, um, the, uh, origin of the, of the companies
who are given the, uh, or the entities which are,
which are given the licenses, then, I mean,
IEE
Either way would work. Like
if you're just trying to control the 15 licensed ones
so that non-licensed, um, uh,
gambling providers can't benefit
or operate illegally in New Zealand,
the banking control system would, uh, prevent that.
And equally, if you allowed Class four to, uh, progress
to online like every other sector has, um, you could also,
uh, ringfence that and secure that by the same means.
So yeah, it's the banking mechanism could be used
to control unlicensed operators.
Uh, thank you. Thank you very much for that, cam.
We appreciate your oral submission
today and your written submission.
And thank you, uh, very much for joining us. Thank you.
Thank you, thank you. We now have the New Zealand
Telecommunications Forum in person, I believe,
uh, Kim and Dave.
Is that correct? That is, thank you.
Thank you very much for joining us today.
We do have a copy of your Russian submission,
but we've got 10 minutes set aside for your oral submission.
Over to you. Thanks.
Um, Koto, I'm Kim Connelly Stein, I'm the policy director
for the telecommunications forum.
With me today is Dave Simpson from Spark
and Dave as the regulatory, um,
and industry a affairs partner.
Um, we are here to talk to you today about something
that isn't in the bill, um,
but it is something that could be suggested
by other submitters
and potentially introduced
by regulation later down the track.
Um, and that issue is network blocking, sometimes referred
to as website blocking, um, or filtering.
And because this is quite a significant intervention,
we really appreciate the opportunity to talk
to you about three things today.
One is, Dave's gonna take you through just
how it works in case you're not familiar, um, with how, um,
website filtering works.
He'll also mention some limitations on effectiveness,
um, that we're aware of.
Um, and then we'll talk to you about what would need
to be in place from a legal
and a process point of view
if the decision was ultimately made
to include network blocking and an online gambling regime.
So I'll hand over to Dave to tell you how it all works,
Marina. So, um,
as ISPs, we do do some blocking today.
So that is some precedent,
but it is a very much a blunt tool.
Um, so some ISPs like Spark, we block, uh,
websites which are known
to host child sexual abuse material.
Um, and after the Christchurch Mosque shooting, um,
as an industry, we blocked some websites which
we're hosting the shooters videos.
Um, and we're also blocking scam websites
and we're working with the banks
and the, um, the, uh, law enforcement, um, on, on that.
But it is a blunt tool and it's easy to bypass.
So it is worth just noting how, um, the blocking works, um,
just to understand where those limitations can come from.
So let's assume that you're going to, uh, page on Facebook.
So you type in http, uh,
www.facebook.com/whatever.
Dot html. And it's that facebook.com bit,
which is the domain that we're,
we're talking about in terms of blocking.
So when you go to that site on your browser,
your computer says to the, your internet provider,
where do I find that site?
And they say, where do we find facebook.com?
And then we send back some numbers, which tell your computer
where you can find that website on the internet.
And so essentially, when we very simply,
when we do our blocking, when you ask for
where do I find facebook.com?
We'll just say, we just won't give you the location.
So that's kind of how the, the blocking works.
Um, but that works only at the whole website level.
We can't see anything more granular than that.
We can't see individual pages.
Um, and it does knock out that entire website,
but it's also quite easy to bypass.
And the ways to get around it is you can use another server,
another service, who can provide you
with the information about where to find it.
Or you could use something like A VPN,
which can bypasses all those things.
So technology evolution makes it even more
complicated going forward.
So encryption technology, um, continues
to advance on the internet,
and that's deliberately designed to make life safer for us.
The users, when we, you know,
increasingly living our life online privacy,
keeping your banking details safe,
these are really important thing.
So encryption continues to be a key part of the internet,
and that's generally seen as a good thing.
So any website that you go to, which starts H-T-T-P-S,
that means it's secure
between your browser and the internet.
And that means we can't see anything in
that URL except at the moment that, um, site name,
so facebook.com in that scenario.
And so to put it in sort of real world terms,
that would be like someone sending you a
letter at Parliament.
And the letter itself, which is the outside,
all it says is Parliament New Zealand,
and then it's someone in Parliament New Zealand,
who's trusted, who's the one who opens it
and goes, ah, yeah, that's live three room four.
Um, and going forward,
there'll be even encryption technologies are being
introduced, which would even stop
that parliament bit on the front
of the envelope being hidden as well.
So why does that matter? Well, in summary,
we can only block entire websites.
And so in the context of online gambling, maybe that's fine
because there's a site which is on bad online gambling.com.
Okay, we could block that, but actually you may want
to block more granular than that.
So, for example, someone posts a video on YouTube, um, about
how to get round gambling,
restrict online gambling restrictions.
We wouldn't be able to take that individual, um,
YouTube video down.
We'd have to block all of YouTube. Um, or TikTok. Or TikTok.
Yeah. Um, or, um, uh, yeah,
or if an app was, say, hosted on Facebook or anywhere else,
or, or just a few pages within a more legitimate
domain, we can't block those.
So it's all, um, and in, in furthermore than, um, any
of those websites, they can change their address
or change, um, where they're, they're based
or have multiple addresses.
Um, and certainly in Australia,
I think there's over a thousand, um, sites
that have been, um, blocked over there.
So it is a game of whack-a-mole.
So the thing to remember is any filtering, no matter
how complex you try
and make it on the internet side,
it's actually fairly trivial to bypass, um, especially
by motivated individuals.
Um, the technology to bypass it is actually
trivially easy to set up.
Um, it doesn't require much technical knowledge.
Um, and instruction instructions are easily found online.
So other than to stop inadvertent stumbling over a website,
blocking technology really from a technical perspective
has limited effect.
So it's pretty tricky, um, to do.
But if the government or this committee was interested in
pursuing this as an option, there are four safeguards we
think would be really essential to have in the legislation.
So the first thing is telcos would need
some government direction.
Network operators need to be mandated to do this
and not leave to make those discretionary decisions
about restricting access.
And secondly, this needs to be done by a trusted authority.
And this is really important.
They're the ones that would tell you what
to block in Australia.
The, um, Australian Communications
and Media Authority does this by sending notices, um,
to the ips.
Um, and this is also providing really important oversight,
um, if things go wrong.
The third thing we need is a safe harbor from liability.
Um, the consequences for businesses
of having the legitimate website blocked are huge.
Um, and that puts network operators at risk of, um,
of legal action and contract and talk.
And there's also a cost recovery issue, as Dave mentioned.
You know, the amount
of websites being blocked in Australia are like at the
thousands level that, uh,
that is quite real from a a cost point of view.
So we would be looking to see some cost, um, recovery.
Um, so an inclusion, um, our request here as a committee is
blocking should either be ruled out entirely
or, um, if you do wanna consider it, you need to debate
that, um, it needs to be legislated for.
And what we'd recommend is that you would, um, request
officials to do a sort, a risk
and proportionality assessment before you go ahead.
I think when it's, it's a big deal
and leaving it to perhaps be broadened by regulation later,
um, is not the way to go.
So those are our submission points. Thank you.
Happy to answer any questions. Thank you.
Uh, just check with colleagues if they have questions.
I just had a question around
the existing blocking that we do.
Obviously with internal affairs,
there's some particular egregious websites
that are blocked, um, at the moment.
Um, it's, that seems to be fine,
or are people getting around it?
Is that the, is that you advised
Us another, um, way of doing blocking, which is by the,
the government's DIA child exploitation filter.
And we, and that's a voluntary filter
and spark is one of the ISPs we've signed up to it
that only blocks unencrypted URLs.
So in that Facebook example, it would be able to do it,
but it just the HTTE ones,
and that's a very small, um, amount of content
that's behind those.
So again, it's, it, it is easy to bypass passive VPNs, um,
and we continue to support that as, but it's,
So the blocking we have is not effective.
And if we were to do more blocking,
we would need additional tools and safeguards.
Yes. And we, and for that encrypted UR,
we can't go down to that granularity.
It has to be at the web web level, which is why
with ip we blocked domains of the child abuse stuff, is
what it's the, the government.
Yeah. So look, we, we've had quite a bit of advice,
which is vari, uh, variance to it, uh, to itself,
or different, different bits of advice vary in terms of
how we can actually manage it.
So look, let's assume that we go, we we're getting
to the point where we want to have a regulator, a number
of regulated, um, online operators.
Some may be land based, some not, may, maybe not.
It's the way in which we keep the unregulated,
the black market out,
and how effective we, you know, what technology,
geoblocking, et cetera, the, the banking system, you know,
how effective are we likely to be?
I mean, if you could squeeze it down to that, it's fine.
Um, but if it's still, you know,
it's still a big amount, it's not so good.
So how, what are the, the collection
Of tools we've Got? Yeah.
And our advice is
that website blocking is very ineffective.
You know, there'll be, there's just all sorts of ways,
um, to get around it.
Um, but if you did want to do it, you then you'd have
to have quite a bit of, um,
quite a scheme in place to manage it as well.
So you kind of, your cost benefits starts to get, um,
skew. Yeah.
Melissa, uh, you talked about
how people can actually bypass
and actually find things through VPNs.
What percentage of population do you think actually knows
how to operate A VPN?
I Think we might be surprised there's one.
Um, we also need to think about the, you know, the, the,
the category of people who might be trying to get
to the unlicensed sites.
And so that's probably the, the bigger question.
Um, we, we don't have, um, statistics on, on who's doing
that, but it's certainly very easy to install.
And actually, it's probably one of those things,
if you speak to, you know, to try
and block things for your kids that they'll put VPNs.
I mean, it's just downloading an app from the app store
and signing up to an account and off, off you go.
So it is trivially
Easy and you just have to put into YouTube, tell me how
to get around A VPN.
And there's these very helpful videos
that people have prepared.
So it is, the technology might be quite complex
as it is in, in encryption,
but the ways that the tools to get
around it are actually quite trivial.
You can also change to some very basic settings in your
phone to avoid some of these blocks as well.
Yeah, I was actually just wanting some insight for people
who actually did not know, considering the fact that
I was shocked having people could actually access the
Christchurch terrorist videos even
after it was actually blocked.
Yeah, Yeah. And then kids are
using them in schools, you
And they're better at it. Yeah,
They're,
And VPN technology itself is not a bad thing
because it's used for businesses to remote access.
Exactly. But it just means
that you pop out the internet somewhere else.
Yeah. And if that somewhere else is another country which
doesn't have the same rules as it, then you can, you know,
you can bypass what's done locally. Yep.
Thank you so much for that.
Thank you, um, for bringing up a, a
slightly more novel topic for us to consider,
and we appreciate your advice and being with us here today.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you for your time. Appreciate
Technology Human beings.
We have the business and professional, uh, women online.
Cheryl and Vicki, welcome
to the governance administration subcommittee.
Uh, we thank you so much. We a copy
of your, uh, written submission.
We can see, see you both and I think hear you both too.
Uh, we've got 10 minutes set aside for your submission,
uh, and over to you. Thank you,
Kira. Thank you,
Kira Coto.
Um, my name is Cheryl Markey Brooks,
and I'm here representing BPW New Zealand.
We are a nationwide organization advocating
for gender equity,
women's economic empowerment, and social wellbeing.
So BPW New Zealand has a long history
of policy advocacy in areas affecting women, youth,
and vulnerable communities,
particularly in the digital space.
So today I am speaking
to our submission on the online casino gambling bill,
which reflects our concerns about the risk this bill
presents of strong safeguards are not in place
while we support regulation and principle.
It must be accompanied by harm reduction frameworks,
genuine informed policy and ongoing public accountability.
So our main concerns, firstly,
the impact on women and families.
Online gambling often affects women indirectly.
For example, financial instability caused by gambling
can lead to emotional distress, increased caregiver burdens
and disruption in household wellbeing.
Research here in New Zealand shows that women carry a lot
of the secondary impacts when family members
gamble problematically.
Secondly, disapp dis appropriate, um,
impact on vulnerable groups, low income households, Maori
and Pacific communities,
and women in precarious economic situations
are at greater risk.
Without careful regulation,
online gambling can replicate overseas models
that prioritize profit over wellbeing.
And thirdly, without strong monitoring,
licensing regimes risk, leaving users exposed
to unsafe practices, advertising
and digital targeting in particular, can normalize gambling,
make it appealing to young people,
and increase harm of left unchecked.
So I want to pass over to Vicki now who works in the area
of budgeting, and she will just give you an overview of
what a real situation is like.
Thank you. So, um, Kira,
I, I'm not coming any, oh, well, I'll speak.
Um, I'm working South Auckland with whanau
and financial distress,
and a young father who I've worked with lost his job
and with time on his hands, had beco begun, um,
become addicted to online gambling.
Now, the bank statements told the story of
what was happening, the increased gambling payments while
rent and power payments were dishonored,
and he maxed out an existing credit card.
So him, his partner
and three children became dependent on the support
of local charities for food parcels.
And the family were close to being evicted from their rental
trust in the relationship disappeared as death spiraled,
and the man came close to suicide.
Now, what would've helped in this situation is a mandatory
pre-commitment on the gambling platform
to establish capson spending and on time.
And this is standard in Germany, Finlay, Finland, Norway,
and many other countries,
plus a ban on credit cards being used in payments.
And if there was no your customer obligations on operators,
then when caps were reached
or changed by the customer, the operator would be obliged
to look at the history of that client
and determine if problem gambling was occurring.
And if so, ban that customer to minimize harm.
Earlier intervention prevents major harm.
So Cheryl will wrap up now.
Thank you. Thank you, Vicki.
So, BPW New Zealand supports the intent
to regulate online gambling,
but licensing alone will not prevent harm.
We strongly recommend that any new regime is gender
informed, community driven,
and prioritizes the wellbeing of women, families,
and vulnerable communities over profit.
This is not just a matter of legal compliance,
it's about protecting New Zealanders from financial, social,
and emotional harm.
Strong safeguards, transparency
and harm reduction must be central to this bill.
And we leave time for any questions if there was any.
Thank you so much. We do have a question from
Melissa Lee, uh,
Thank you for that submission.
And, um, thank you for the example that you actually quoted.
I'm actually interested in what, uh, what you mean by gender
informed community driven safeguards.
Um, you might be able to add some in here as well, Vicki.
Um, if you wouldn't mind.
Um, so this is the concern about families.
Um, it's also the concern about the settings at what, um,
any operator when they're actually putting in place, uh,
caps or how they actually ban people from, um,
as a client on that platform.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you.
Do you have, um, a view on, obviously I think the, the harm
of gambling is something that we've, we've heard about
and there's, I think, been an acceptance from a lot
of the submitters around that.
Do you have a, um, a view on the community, um,
provision that gambling should have?
So we've heard from a number of SP sporting organizations,
for example, that if there is gambling, there should be, um,
a, a a percentage, um, of the proceeds of that, that go back
to the community.
Do you, do you think given that gambling is likely
to take place, that that should be
something that also occurs?
Or is it your, the view of the organization
that it should not occur at all?
Um, even if there is some community, um, benefit from that?
So in general, well, on average for every problem gamble,
at least six people are affected.
And so that ripples out into a community.
And I do believe that the license, the, uh, the fee
that you are looking at
to go back into the community at the moment is, is just, um,
not enough that there is a huge problem there
and more from proceeds needs to go back
to mitigate that harm.
Okay. Thank you. That's really helpful.
Thank you so much, uh, to you both for joining us today
and for your written submission and answering our questions.
Kia, welcome. Thank
You.
Thank you. Understand, we have, uh,
New Zealand Lotteries Commission in person.
Welcome. Please grab some extra chairs if
you, I you need it.
That's fine. Plenty of space
around the table today to clear that I'm buying.
Um, Melissa is a customer of yours as,
as I'm sure many, many of us, um,
are rather usually leave the lot buying to, to my husband.
However, um, thank you very much
for your written submission.
We've got a copy of that.
We've got 10 minutes for your oral submission today, um,
and I know you'll have some comments
to make. So over to you.
Thank you. Uh, tan Ko. Good morning everyone.
Uh, my name is Mark Todd,
and I'm chair of the New Zealand Lotteries Commission
known to us all as lotto.
Um, I'm joined by Jason Delamore, our CEO
and Lucy Fullerton, our head of regulatory affairs.
Um, lotto is a crown entity owned by all New Zealanders.
Our mission is clear to serve communities
through reliable returns and robust harm minimization.
Last year we generated $434 million in profits, all
of which was transferred to the lottery grants board
for community purposes.
We also paid approximately $200 million in taxes and levies.
Our community funding is distributed independently of lotto
and supports thousands of community causes,
including grassroots sports
and vital community organizations such as Coast Guard Surf,
life Saving, and the Mental Health Foundation.
Our Gambling Harm minimization program is recognized
as world and is a focus for every single one of our team
and your board as kaki of this business.
We believe it is critical Lotto continues
to provide a source of responsible
community funding into the future.
The regulation of online casinos is a path well traveled
globally, and there are many learnings from other
jurisdictions, including
that online casinos might offer products
that could encroach on lotto if the law does not allow them
or does not prevent them from doing so.
Two examples of synthetic lotteries
and network progressive slot jackpots.
Network jackpots would allow all online casinos licensed
to New Zealand to collectively offer large shared lottery
like jackpots.
Lotto has a statutory function to advise on lotteries
and has a good understanding of
how different regulatory settings have impacted
on the offshore markets.
Our submission focuses on the impact this bill could have on
our business and
so on New Zealand communities if we don't get the legal
and the regulatory settings right.
And I'll pass to Jason to make some additional comments.
Thank you, mark. Antenna Koto, thank you for the opportunity
to speak with you today.
Uh, we understand that in considering this bill,
the committee will be grappling with a many complex
and competing issues, but our ask today is very simple.
We want to ensure that, that this bill only does
what it is intended to do.
That is to regulate this currently unregulated
and potentially harmful market to protect consumers
and minimize harm, and
to give the regulator the powers it needs
to enforce the rules.
We understand there is no policy intent
to allow online casinos
to expand into more mainstream products, such as Ries
or to encroach on existing
and responsible domestic providers.
But as drafted, we believe the bill
could allow this to happen.
Our recommendations, which are set out more in our detailed
submission are as follows.
Firstly, to clarify the scope of the bill, as is the case
with the existing gambling act,
this bill should clearly define the products
that online casinos may offer to avoid operators expanding
beyond traditional casino gambling.
LSO operates under very prescriptive game rules,
which are secondary legislation and each
and every one approved by the minister.
However, under this bill, there are no requirements
for online casinos to make or adhere to any such game rules.
Adding a requirement for online casinos
to make game rules reduces the risk
of online casinos offering the same products
as Lotto New Zealand, but without any of the same regulatory
or harm minimization Restrictions, uh, on game design,
Keno is a good example here.
Under Lottos keynote game rules draws take place just four
times a day, which forces players to take a break in
between in between draws.
However, online casinos on the other hand,
usually have a rapid draw version of, of keno,
where those draws could take place every four minutes
instead of four times a day.
Uh, and this can see players playing draw
after draw through the whole day
as they chase losses significantly increase the potential
to gambling harm and to avoid the risk of regularly overlap.
The bill should also make clear
that Lottos games are not subject to this new regime.
Secondly, the bill to protect Lottos community contributions
under this bill online casinos will compete directly
with Lottos keynote and online Instant Games,
which currently accounts for
around $50 million in community, uh,
annual community contributions.
This makes it essential for that for lottos core business
of lotto power
and strike as properly protected to ensure long-term
and sustainable community funding.
Protecting the national offering is a kone approach in other
jurisdictions, and a similar protective approach in the
New Zealand context was implemented with a recent racing
Industry Amendment Act, which gave long-term protection
to the TAB to achieve this level of protection for lotto.
We, we recommend that the definition
of protected New Zealand lottery is strengthened, uh,
more than currently, and that misleading products such
as synthetic IES are prohibited.
Thirdly, the bill should enhance harm from
online casino operator.
Casino products is minimized.
The purpose of this bill should align with the gambling act
by explicitly stating that it does not seek
to grow gambling within New Zealand.
We understand the rationale for putting detailed rules
around advertising and harm minimization into the regs,
provided these rules are robust and applied effectively.
We also think the empowering provisions in this bill should
be strengthened to include provisions
for mandatory loss limits
and a centralized self-exclusion register.
Finally, the bill must give the regulator effective tools
to block unlicensed operators.
We believe a broader suite of measures is required
to effectively block the unlicensed market,
and many of these measures may require empowering provisions
based on our observations from other markets.
We also think it's volatile.
The regulator is operating with a speed
and effectiveness that a digital market
with 15 operators would demand.
In closing, our request is simple.
Please ensure that the bill firstly protects the unique role
and value of lotto in funding communities,
and secondly, provides harm, minimization me measures
that keep all New Zealanders safe.
Uh, I'd like to note that our submission has detailed
drafting suggestions in it as well.
So thank you for the opportunity
and we welcome any questions.
Thank you. Um, thank you for your detailed submission
or also for your suggestions.
Yeah. Um, do you, do you have a question?
I've got? Yeah, I, I wanna go back.
I, I appreciate the, uh, detailed submissions
that I actually read last night.
Quite liked. I'm trying to actually get, um, your
request in relation to the synthetic lotteries.
I'm guessing you are actually talking about the ability
to do lot, uh, lottery, like keynote is that one?
Yeah, the synthetic lotteries are slightly different.
So they're gambling on the outcome
of a foreign lottery, right.
And what those lotteries are often
Presented. I missed it. Maybe
my hearings,
but what did you want us to do about it?
It should be banned. Banned, okay. Yeah.
Be next to Catalyst. That suggested Rick
Right. With the,
um, my question was really,
I don't know if you were here for our, um, submitters
that we're talking about the utility of blocking, um,
particular websites.
Um, you, in your written submission, you've um, kind
of made quite a few suggestions around
blocking payment types and unlicensed websites.
I just wanted to ask if, um, here having heard
that information, if you had any further comment
to make on the utility of, of blocking or,
or other suggestions which may, um, uh,
help to alleviate some of the concerns
that people have expressed around the utility of blocking?
Yeah, I think it's one tool in the
toolbox that could be used.
Um, also some of the other lottery,
Singapore pools is a good example.
So they're, um, rolling out new technology, AI technology
that will help detect those sites as well.
So blocking stops, people getting in the first place, uh,
advanced detection will help you find it when it's happening
so that there's another tool
in the toolbox that could be used.
And I think the point there,
they talk about the Swiss cheese approach overseas.
Yeah. That every approach has its holes and its drawbacks,
but you just have to have as many as possible to capture
To actually be effective.
Yeah. Okay. Um,
Yeah, look, just, just one, um,
the one thing you haven't done, which so many have done,
is a comment on where any proceeds from, um,
online gambling go.
Uh, now your purpose is to, essentially, your purpose is not
to generate tax, whether you do, it's not just to exist,
it's to provide funding for community purposes.
Um, that's what Class four does,
and obviously there's a lot of concern
about threat to class four.
So essentially that in a sense undermines
indirectly your own purpose.
You haven't commented on whether we should be looking
to essentially support the work that you do, uh,
by making sure that the online, uh, regime also does that
as opposed to doesn't.
We would observe that this legislation, um, um, all the,
um, accessing
of online gaming gambling providers will take space
or take share from all players in this space.
We assume that you do not want to grow the market,
and we have identified in our submission that part
of the market that we've acknowledged the keynote
and games market that we would, would be competing with.
Um, so we already think that a portion
of our community contribution is going to be at risk just
as a portion of community contribution from
Class four will be at risk.
Um, if there's a different view as to how that, how
that approach would be taken from a political perspective,
well that's, that's really, that's really your core.
Well that's why I was asking if you haven't commented on
that and uh, you know, I was inviting you
to comment on whether it'll be valuable to support your work
by, um, some sort of arrangement in this legislation.
They actually did do that. Well, we, our role, our role
of course is to create money so
that the Lottery Grounds Board actually distributes
that money to the respective community.
So we have a business role to play with flagging which part
of the business would be affected.
But that's a different question. Distinction.
Thank Melissa. The online casinos actually already in
this and people are accessing it.
So have you actually seen impacts to your game,
like Keynote as you said?
Or have you actually got noticed
and you think this new, um, regulation that we are trying
to, I, you know, impose is actually gonna highlight,
you know, our online gaming
and that's gonna be the one that's gonna create a problem.
It's not one that we can detect at the moment,
but today's market is quite different than if you have
around fif, you know, up to 15
of them advertising at a much different, uh,
level than what's happening today than then.
Then we, we do expect to see an impact. Yeah.
Alright. We're at time now.
So thank you very much for coming in and person,
and thank you very much for your detail submission
and suggestions around the drafting.
We really appreciate it. Thank you. Thank you, thank you.
Now I have, uh, foundation, uh, Evans joining us.
I think she saw you there before.
Hailey and Kelly. Kelly
Apologies. Um,
Tina Coto, my name is Dr.
Kaylee Evans and I'm a trustee on the board
of the Hapi Foundation,
and I'm here to talk to you today about the importance
of community funding that comes from the gambling industry,
um, specifically when it comes to helping create a society
that is fully inclusive of disabled people.
Um, so currently the Hi Hapi Foundation,
what we do is we are an organization
that focuses on reducing the barrier, the impact
of barriers in the community by bridging the gap
between businesses and the needs of disabled people.
We can do this through a combination of the sales revenue
that we get from our H high access cards, um,
but also the community funding
that we get from the gambling industry,
which helps fill in those gaps.
Um, those gaps include things like paying our staff,
covering office overheads,
helping onboard businesses and work.
The biggest one is us working on expanding the Hapa access
card outside of oto Tahi Christchurch.
Um, just I guess for a few statistics, as of 2024,
the pokies alone contributed $366 million
to the community with approximately 73 million of that going
to 2,325 community organizations,
including us at the Hapi Foundation.
That's a large amount of community groups doing a lot
of good in the community.
Um, and if this bill were to pass in its current state,
there's a real concern that that pool
of funding would get smaller, um,
as people move from doing things like playing the lottery
pokies to online gambling, which would
therefore potentially decrease the amount
of funding available to community groups
to do the work they do in service of their communities.
Um, you may be asking why it's important
that community groups such as ours, like Hapa, um, have
that kind of funding available.
Well, according to the latest census, um,
20 23, 1 in six New Zealanders identify as disabled.
That's approximately 851,000 people.
Um, for those with a disability
participating in social activities can be difficult, um, due
to barriers such as unmet access needs, um,
which then can contribute to decreased health
and wellbeing, which can contribute
to increased costs in the healthcare system,
while at the same time actually actively
decreasing consumer spending.
Um, because if disabled people aren't able
to access things like cafes or art museums
or anything like that, they aren't able
to spend their money, um, at those places,
which is a reminder that's almost a million people
that don't have easy access to a lot
of businesses here in Otay.
Um, I wanted to share a story with you about why
what we do is so important, um, that I was talking
to the manager of the PI Foundation the other day
and she told me a story that we received, um, about
how the Hapi access card had an impact on an individual
with a disability and their family.
Um, there was a mother who sent us an email
that she was expressing how happy she was
to have found our card, um, to be able to use with her son
who has severe autism.
She said her son was having a lot of difficulty engaging
with physical activity, um, in the school setting
because it was around like team sports
and just things that he found really
difficult due to his autism.
Um, they decided
to try their local indoor rock climbing gym,
which has been certified through Hippy, um, that
where people can show their access card
and the rock climbing gym will help make sure things are
accessible for them, um,
by including things like letting a carer in, um, for free,
uh, offering discounts, um,
having low sensory hours, that kind of thing.
Um, her son tried it and her son absolutely loved it,
and she was so happy
that he found a physical activity he could
enjoy and participate in.
Um, and that was all thanks to a business
that worked together with us to make sure
that things were accessible, um, for, you know, someone
with autism or, you know, accessible to people
with other disabilities as well.
Um, and that's also, if you think about it too,
that's also really good for the business, um,
because the person
and the family has had a positive experience
and that's, I'm sure you probably aware, you know,
positive experiences with businesses work it surround and,
and also now that business has a really faithful returning
customer because they know their access needs can be met.
Um, so without the funding from community grants,
we at the Hippy Foundation wouldn't be able to continue
to carry out the activities that make local businesses
of Ontario more accessible for disabled people
and their family slash au.
Um, therefore our recommendation is
that the online casino gambling bill should be embedded
with the same principles
that were founded in the Gambling Act 2003
and the 1977 Gambling and Laies act
before it, that gambling should benefit the community.
We recommend to carry this out by requiring
that some revenue from online gambling be shared
with the community in the form
of community funding slash grants.
So thank you and open for questions.
Thank you so much for your submission and for,
and for sharing that, uh, story.
It was really, um, good to illustrate the work
that your organization does, uh,
through sharing that personal story.
I don't have any further questions.
I think your submission's really clear.
Just keep I'm, keep my, um, colleagues, thank you so much,
uh, Kaylee for your time
and for joining us today. We really appreciate it.
Thank you. Thank you. Take care. Thank next day. Bye.
Thank you. I think we now have the, uh,
core United Tennis Club Incorporated
who are joining us in person.
Thank you, Sharon.
Probably to clear I was once A member long time ago,
we've conflicts of interest place today, which just,
just shows I think that, um,
hopefully our members are very connected to the community.
So welcome.
Thank, thank you. Thank you very much. Um,
Thank you For inviting us to appear before you
and we're, um, pleased to be able to do so. No worries.
So Much. Yes.
I'm, I'm the recently elected president
of the Go United Tennis Club with me as my colleague,
our committee colleague Mark story.
Congratulations. Uh, you will have seen our submission
and, uh, like the previous submitters,
our concern is relates to, uh, the, uh,
funding available to sports clubs from, uh,
the gaming Trusts, which has been available under
previous legislation for nearly 50 years.
And, uh, as our submission explains,
funding from gaming trust is an important source of income
for our club, and we would recommend
that the legislation setting up the regulated online casino
gambling regime in New Zealand includes that same principle
that has been in the gambling act
as currently in the Gambling Act, 2003 previous legislation
that gambling should benefit the community
and that it would require some revenue from online casino
gambling to be shared within the community.
And our view not requiring this will reduce the amount
of funding going to the community
as gamblers move from land-based casinos
to online casino gambling.
And we of the view that this is likely
to happen relatively quickly, uh, in the, as soon
as the new regulatory regime comes, comes into effect, uh,
because you just need to look at what's happened with, uh,
the provision of physical services which are more easily
gained online, uh, such as travel agents and banking.
Uh, so we assume that this will, uh, happen quite quickly
and this would be at a time when community organizations,
uh, particularly sports clubs are having difficulty anyway,
attracting and retaining members
because of digital competition.
And, uh, in increasing difficulty in fundraising
and retaining sponsors for our club,
which is wholly run by volunteers, uh, not being able
to access grant funding for activities
and supplies that our club needs.
And the activities we are able to offer to our community,
uh, would result in either
a reasonable increase in subscriptions of
around 30 odd dollars a year averaged across the whole club
membership, um, or a reduction in services.
And the, the services
that we would most likely reduce first up are those
that are applicable for the whole community.
We run a, um, Friday night junior club session,
which is open to all children in the ROI community.
Uh, that ha uh, that is the bulk of the funding for running
that does come, has come in recent years from, uh,
grants from the gaming trust.
We would probably not be able to do that, uh,
at the level we are currently able if we were not able
to get access grant funding for it.
The other concern we have with the failure of the bill to
yet require, um, our online, uh, casinos
to provide some revenue for community things is that
the importance of physical activity
and community connectedness, uh, is,
uh, very important at this time, both for physical
and mental health and as the previous submitter, uh,
implied also for the local community businesses.
Um, and it would be unfortunate if more
and more sports clubs were not able to continue to operate
and continue to be part of a vibrant community.
So, uh, just winding up, I just repeat our recommendation
that the bill does provide
and requires that some revenue from online casino gambling
be shared with the community.
And, uh, that's it.
Mark, thank you comments.
Mark, we do have a question from Andy Foster. Thank you.
Thank you for all the work you do. Oh, thank you.
Um, question I've got is the, the final wording
that you've got there, the recommendation,
that's one we've actually seen from a lot of different Yes.
Sports clubs. Um,
can you just tell us a little bit about the process
that there's been, 'cause obviously there's been a lot
of dialogue amongst the supporting community about this,
just how that dialogue's, um, happened for, uh, URA United.
Uh, as I recollect, um,
the first mention of this was actually
one of our committee meetings.
I think one of our, uh, committee members
had heard it at another club
and, uh, uh, he raised it at, at
that stage I hadn't heard anything about it.
I inquired from, uh, our local, um,
regional organization to central, uh, region,
and they were able to say, yes, this is
what they're reporting is correct.
Yeah. Uh, and, uh, more recently got in touch
with the Community Sport collective.
Right. Okay. So
You've been reaching out to them to
Get that, uh oh no, they also have come back.
They've also come back as well. Uh, yes.
So it, so it's been, but uh, it has been, uh, interactive,
uh, because one of the things
that I read in the material
provided by DIA was that there was not any evidence really
to suggest that, um, uh, there would be a move
from people going gamblers, going
to the local pokey to doing it online.
And, uh, we simply don't agree with that.
And, uh, I think the, uh,
community sports collective has actually put together quite
a bit of material to illustrate that. I thank
You. Thank you. And
just a sub metric question on that,
that is a, a sentiment that we've heard echoed, uh,
quite a bit, that there should be, um, uh,
what is it gambling should benefit the community,
but that, is that something that is, um, that's a genuine
belief of your organization, that, that if we are
to have gambling that there should be a community benefit?
Yes. We, we feel one of our purposes is
to be connected with our community
and contributing to a vibrant community.
We think that, uh, if we don't have help
to do that, uh, we are not going to be able to continue
to deliver the services
and functions that we
as a tennis club can currently provide.
Uh, I'm not sure whether revenue from
gambling is exactly, uh, the, uh, um,
thing we need, but there would, we would not be able
to provide the input into our community
that we currently can if we did not have access
to external funding over
and above our membership subscriptions and days.
Thank you. Point well made. Thank you so much.
Thank you Sharon. And thank you,
mark you very much for joining us today.
Right. Our next submitter is the Southern Cancer Society
Trust, and I understand we've got Heather,
who is joining us via Zoom.
Welcome, Heather. We can see you.
I think you're on mute though.
There we go. There you go.
Perfect. Thank you so much.
Thank you for joining us today.
We've got a copy of your written submission, uh,
and we've got 10 minutes set aside
to hear your oral submission. Over to you. Thank
You so much. I appreciate
you having me.
Um, I also have my colleague here somewhere,
but she may not be able to join at the same time,
but, uh, she is here as well.
Um, my name is Heather Locke and I am the grant
and bequest specialist for Cancer Society Southern.
So I essentially look after Cancer
Society for the South Island.
Uh, I'll give you a little bit of information about us.
Uh, just to give you some background,
cancer is the number one killer of New Zealand, uh,
with 28,000 diagnoses per year
and 10,000 deaths per year.
Uh, that's 27 people a day dying in this country.
Uh, which you'll recall was the height
of COVID fatality numbers every single day.
The Cancer Society is the leading NGO committed
to reducing these grim numbers,
and it is 100% community funded
with no government contracts.
New Zealand, unfortunately, is one
of the lowest ranking in the OECD for cancer care.
Uh, and while treatment is free, the wraparound support
that improves cancer outcomes is not,
and that's where we fill the gap.
We provide free advice
and cancer manage, uh, on cancer management
and help navigating the healthcare sector.
We offer free counseling.
We offer financial assistance with vouchers
for those losing wages due to illness.
Uh, we offer thousands of kilometers worth of free drives
to appointments anywhere on the south island
for anyone who needs them.
And we offer free accommodation
for patients receiving treatment in Dunedin
or Christchurch Hospital in any of our 61 rooms.
Uh, we also do, uh,
we also fund cutting edge research across the country,
including our Christchurch tissue bank, uh,
where 15,000 tissue specimens are stored and
provided for researchers looking for better treatments,
better screening processes, and even cures.
Uh, in the last 12 months, we have received nearly, well,
actually as of this morning, over $650,000
of funds from gambling based grants.
Uh, these have included salary coverages
for our frontline workers.
Uh, it included a pilot project where the nutrition
and physio requirements specific
to cancer patients were covered with the aim of, uh,
reducing the number of recurring cancers,
which in turn would keep them out of the healthcare system.
Uh, and they have also helped us with research.
Uh, they recently bought us a machine
that standardizes staining of the tissue,
which makes them more readable by ai.
Uh, this has saved them hundreds if not thousands
of men hours of doing it manually.
Uh, introducing 15 new licenses may not seem very
consequential to the New Zealand gambling landscape,
but I can tell you that every single time I apply
for these current grants, uh, I am informed
that they are oversubscribed all of the charities,
and there are so many of us.
There's over 200 in New Zealand
with the word cancer in it alone, uh,
are fighting for the same dollar.
Uh, if new options for gamblers are introduced
that have no obligation to the community
and the revenue collected
by the current grant giving groups will shrink further, uh,
that money that could have helped the one in three
who will get a cancer diagnosis in
this country in their lifetime.
Uh, it will be siphoned away from our shores in disappear.
I cannot overstate how critical these uh,
grants are to our work.
And under this new bill,
not only will these new I have new licenses offered no
redeeming community funding, uh, for us, uh,
they will damage the pool of existing funding
and we hope that you agree that this is unacceptable.
Uh, we, we must agree that if overseas interest are going
to profit from our communities,
then they must be beholden to them as well.
Uh, we ask that you reconsider
and amend this bill to include community
grants as part of their model.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, uh, for your submission.
Heather, I've just checked with my colleagues
to see if they've got any questions for you.
Um, I just had a question for you.
Um, in terms of the, uh, funding
that you have received over recent years, have you seen
that, um, become, I know
that you've said it's quite difficult
and there's, it's oversubscribed.
Has that been particularly problematic in the last, uh,
few years or recent time period from your experience?
Absolutely. Um, I think
as funding becomes increasingly harder, you know, um,
when you enter a an uncertain economy, the first thing
that people do is scratch their donations, subscriptions,
um, but also as online, uh, um,
applications have become easier.
Uh, more charities have found that they are able
to do them and put them on.
And that's wonderful of course.
But that means that there's more
competition for the rest of us.
So yes. Whereas it used to be a bit easier, uh,
back in the day, uh, it's, it's gotten harder.
Thank you so much for that, Heather.
We really appreciate you joining us today,
and thank you so much for the work that you do,
um, in your work.
It's, it's really appreciated.
Of course. Thank you so much for your time.
Thank you. Right.
We have our next submitter who I believe is on Zoom.
We've got the Mato Road Rodeo Club and we've got Alice,
Can you hear me?
Can and we can see you. Thank you so much
for joining us, Alice.
We've got a copy of your, uh, written submission, uh,
that we've had a chance to read,
and we've got 10 minutes set aside
for your oral submission today.
So, uh, we'll hand over to you
and you're welcome to leave a few minutes
for questions if you wish, or
or to utilize all of that time. Thank you.
Um, from the email, I presume
that you guys would have questions for me
and you would've ridden read our submission,
so I'm just prepared to answer questions, basically.
Thank you. I'll just check with, uh,
my colleagues if they do have questions.
Um, no, I think,
I think that's, uh, that they're fine for a question.
I'll ask you a question, Alice, just, um,
because you, we've had the, um, honor
of having you join our committee today.
Uh, we've heard, uh, from the previous submitter
and some other submitters that, uh,
funding has been quite difficult to come
by in the last, uh, wee while.
Is that something that you've experienced
with the work in your club at all?
Absolutely. Um, I think as the lady
mentioned previously, that the economy
and especially in Southland is, is very strained.
Um, we've had a couple of, um,
seriously tough years financially in the rural community
and, um, a lot of businesses that would usually
support us are not able to,
so we definitely rely on funding from things like the,
the gambling and the pokies.
Um, And it's fair to say that
events like ours, um, are great for the community.
We, it's an opportunity for families to get off the farm,
see their friends, just have a change of environment
because things have been pretty tough.
Um, and then also
with, um, the ability
to get online donations now with that becoming easier, um,
I would agree with the, the previous lady
and saying that the competition has increased.
So, um,
our sport is very much under the spotlight in terms of,
um, social license.
So we find it quite hard for businesses to come on board
with us because they have been attacked, um,
by the groups that are anti our sport.
So we are finding we've got that level of, um,
attack as well as, as losing our funding
through the really bad economy at the moment.
Um, we are really, it's really scary to think
that this could change
and we won't get the ability to, um, apply
for this funding anymore.
I think it's really important for, um, the funding
to come from the gambling world, for the rural communities.
Sorry, I'm a bit nervous.
No worries. Uh, Melissa Lee has a question.
Hi. Um, thank you for that.
Um, how many events do you actually put on as a club
and also apart,
and what does that actually bring to your members?
What kind you, you talked about how it's a family gathering,
it's a time for you to actually get away from the farm.
Uh, it would, it would be really, um,
appreciated if you could actually share what
that actually mean for the
families who are involved in this.
Okay. So you've got a two part question there.
You've got the families
that are involved in running our club, um,
and then you've got the families who are in the community
that come to our event for the day and have a day out.
So, um, so you've got two different types there.
Um, and then you've got another level
because our family in particular are involved with, um,
our sport nationally.
So we help other clubs as well, put their events on.
And we compete all over New Zealand.
Um, so you've got,
yeah, you've got so many levels of people.
We, we have our, our,
our rodeo is probably considered a smaller event in terms
of New Zealand rodeos,
but we, um, we are still looking at having
to find about $50,000 to run our event.
It's a huge cost.
Um, and we rely on donations and funding
and then we rely on people coming through the gate, um,
to come and watch because it is a day out
that people can come in, bring their family
with their friends, they can have a hot dog and some chips,
or have a beer and have a yarn
and spend the day, hopefully in the sun
because we order that.
But, um, yeah, it's, it's, we, we would consider ourselves
to be a, a really, um, important fixture
in our local calendar of events down here.
Yeah.
Thank you so much Alice.
Thank you very much for your written submission
and for joining us today and answering our questions.
We really appreciate it.
That's okay. Hopefully I wasn't too nervous.
No, no, you did well. You were fine.
Came across really well. I'm very articulate. Thank you.
Okay, thank you. Thank you.
Our next submitter is cycling Marlborough,
and we've got, I think Ross,
who is the president joining us.
Welcome Ross. Thank you for joining us today.
We've got a copy of your written submission
and 10 minutes set aside to hear from you orally today.
So over to you. Thank
You. Great. Thank, thank you for
your time
and for the opportunity to speak to you all.
So our submission, uh, made on behalf
of cycling Marlborough, um, encompassing road cycling,
track cycling across the district, um, also hosting regional
and national events.
Um, we, we strongly oppose the current wording,
the proposed bill, which fails
to protect the longstanding principle
that gambling revenue should benefit the community
to help offset, uh,
recognize social harm, uh, without amendment.
The bill risks undermining the viability
of grassroots sports across New Zealand.
Uh, we're also concerned
that the official advice parliament's received is
that the bill is not expected
to impact on the availability of grant funding.
Uh, we believe this is deeply flawed
and has a significant impact on the underlying assumptions
that the bill is actually based on.
Uh, we agree online gambling should be regulated
to protect our most vulnerable.
Uh, however, with the trends towards online
and digital platforms extending across all aspects of life,
it's hard to imagine that the current situation will remain
unchanged and the years ahead.
It doesn't require a great leap of faith
to anticipate less physical gambling
with less provider revenue, less funds available
for community grants and increased online gambling
with no social benefits flowing.
Uh, our, our club applies for
and receives around about $15,000 annually from grants
sourced through gambling proceeds.
And these funds are critical. Uh, they allow us
to host expensive national events such
as these cycling New Zealand School Southern Tour,
which draws riders from across New Zealand
that provides specialist coaching
and training resources for developing junior athletes, uh,
replace or upgrade essential equipment
and facilities such as our track racing venue.
And recently, unfortunately having
to replace a stolen motorbike.
And without such support, these initiatives would not occur.
So the financial and volunteer capacity
of local clubs is already stretched.
The grants provide some essential relief from
otherwise unsustainable costs even
before this bill is introduced.
We're aware that gambling grants are becoming
harder to obtain.
The scope of support is being narrowed,
and requests are often partly funded rather than fully
funded, indicating less money available
and increased demand through these sources.
While we do have support from local private sponsors,
their funds are also limited subject
to many competing demands and depressed economic conditions
and not helping the situation.
Traditional funding sources are also under pressure.
They're very labor intensive
and they place an increased burden on a stretch volunteer
base to give you an idea of of costs
and the pressures that we face.
Uh, traffic management
for our main site in New Zealand Southern Tour event has
risen from $500 six years ago to around $5,000.
Now with some quotes up
to $13,000 cost of St.
John's first aid coverage was $440 six years ago,
is now two and a half thousand dollars.
So these increases occur at a time when
volunteers are harder to recruit.
Families are under financial strain.
Increasing entry fees to cover increased costs, uh,
is expected to lead to a reduction in participants,
which runs contrary to our goal
to make this an affordable event
for developing junior riders.
Realistically, we can't absorb these extra costs
and these larger events need to at least break even
without funding from grants being available
to cover a reasonable portion of these costs.
And many other events like this, uh,
will not be financially viable.
Our concern is these would cease to exist.
Our, our main points against the current wording is
that it does undermine a proven principle.
For nearly five decades, legislations required
that gambling proceeds be returned to the community
under the Gaming and Lotteries Act.
And the Gambling Act 2003 embed this principle,
the current bill abandons that creates a two tier system
where online operators retain profit without equivalent
community responsibility.
We fear this creates some unintended consequences for sport.
Community sports are already facing declining participation,
rising costs, and competition from digital entertainment.
Removing access to gambling related grants will increase
these pressures, likely leading to reduced opportunities
for junior athletes and weakening grassroots structures
that underpin New Zealand sporting system.
We also feel this contradicts government health priorities.
So as excessive governments recognize physical inactivity
as a leading health risk sport improves physical
and mental wellbeing, fosters youth development
and strengthens community connection.
Removing one of sport's core funding streams
directly undermines those objectives
and fairness and harm mitigation.
Gambling causes social harm requiring operators to return.
A portion of revving to the community has long been
recognized as an appropriate mitigation for this,
allowing online casinos
to avoid this responsibility shifts costs back onto local
communities while profits are extracted offshore
or concentrated in private hands.
Our submission is that the bill be amended
to embed the principle of community benefit requiring
that online casino gambling revenue,
like physical gambling be shared with communities.
We can't see any reason for different rules to apply
for traditional versus online gambling operators.
Gambling is gambling. We asked the bill
to prioritize funding for community sport given its proven
contribution to public health, youth engagement,
social cohesion, and establish an equitable mechanism
ensuring online operators contribute fairly preventing
erosion of funding streams which are
essential to grassroots sport.
In conclusion, cycling malborough,
like many community organizations nationwide,
depends on gambling derived grants to survive
the proposed bill in its current form.
Risks dismantling a model
that served New Zealand well for over 50 years.
We respectfully urge parliament to uphold the principle
that gambling should benefit the community.
This must extend to online gambling to ensure fairness,
continuity, and the protection of grassroots sport
as a cornerstone New Zealand society.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today.
Thank you so much Ross.
And thank you for your Russian submission.
And also, um, I don't have a question,
but I just wanna acknowledge the history
of your organization
and I, I don't think I've seen a reference
to the Empire Games, um, for a very long time.
My mother actually perform
of Empire Games when they're held in New Zealand,
so it's really nice to see that history
and just wanna acknowledge, um, all of that.
So, um, any questions from colleagues? No, thank you.
I think you've, you've made a really clear submission, uh,
Ross, and so we really appreciate, uh,
you coming here today and also the work
that you do. Thank you so much. Thank you.
Thanks. Thanks.
Thank you. Um, we hit our next similar here, uh,
and I understand you're presenting in person today.
Welcome.
Welcome, uh, uh, Jason?
Yes. Yeah. And we've got here. Yes. Jessica.
Jessica, thank you. Thank you for joining us today.
Uh, we've got a copy of your written submission,
the opportunity to look at,
and we've got 10 minutes set aside today
for your oral submission.
Mm-hmm. Uh, so over to you.
Um,
um, just a quick mahi answer, you guys
for all your mahi that you do.
Um, although it's a short mahi, uh, it is one that we give
with love, um, for all of the communities that we serve in.
However, our encouragement to the three that we have sitting
with us today, um, holds more weight than,
than our acknowledgement.
And that encouragement is to, um, listen
to the concerns that we share today.
Not only listen, um, but show some responsive action.
Also like to introduce yourself this
To, um,
and I'm, uh, chief Operating Officer at ha.
Uh, and I'm Jess. I'm one
of the Maori public health managers at ha.
Um, from, um, we'll just briefly intro,
who ha is what we do, um,
our position on this bill.
Um, we'll talk through some of the public health gaps
and concerns that we see
and share some of our recommendations,
and then hopefully some time for questions if you have any.
Uh, so HA was founded in 1996 through the vision
and leadership of T
and the collective efforts of TE t
and UA.
At the time, they recognized the need
for strong Maori presence in public health, particularly
to address the health inequities
that Maori were facing in the greater
Auckland region at the time.
And unfortunately, uh, those inequities, um,
still exist today.
We do, however, operate nationally now advancing Maori
health through collective aspirations, collaboration,
and capable Maori values.
Our vision is to foster Maori public health leadership
that drives lasting transformative change
for future generations.
We are here today to represent the voices of au Hapu Iwi
and communities across who, uh,
experience disproportionate gambling harm,
Um, opposes the online gambling bill in its current form.
Uh, the bill does not represent a public health response.
Instead, it creates a commercial framework
that will expand access to gambling, normalize it further
and deepen inequities.
Particularly for Maori like tobacco
and alcohol, it is a harmful commodity.
Yet this bill does not treat gambling with the same level
of caution, despite the fact
that it shares the same hallmarks.
It's addictive design, aggressive marketing,
and powerful industry influence that normalizes harm.
These industries all extract profit at the expense
of whanau wellbeing.
They all profit from addiction.
Uh, we acknowledge that regulations are well overdue, um,
as our communities of all ages currently have access
to illegal offshore online gambling sites.
Um, however, we now, we now have the opportunity
to get this right to ensure
that we don't res repeat the mistakes made
with land-based pokies, alcohol and tobacco.
This bill and its current form risks putting us on the same
path with online casinos once embedded online casinos will
be extremely difficult to reverse.
So we must act now
to prevent further intergenerational harm and protect the world.
Um, will, in here,
I'll just talk through briefly some of our public,
the public health gaps, um, in this bill.
Now, although this bill claims to prioritize the prevention
and minimization of harm, there are serious gaps
that will infect entrench harm further.
One of our main concerns, if not, one
of the biggest concerns we have is
that this bill will increase access to online casinos in
by allowing 15 licensed platforms to offer online casinos in
creates an environment designed
to maximize gambling access and industry profit.
More operators with potentially multiple platforms
means more marketing, more competition
for players' attention and more opportunities for harm.
Uh, the framing of harm minimization in this bill is
weak and discretionary.
The bill puts the burden on operator's judgment rather than
setting clear enforceable harm minimization standards.
Um, we compare this to tobacco control,
where the rules are not voluntary or operation operator led
or industry led, sorry.
They're mandatory evidence based and strictly enforced.
Uh, another, um, massive concern we have is that
advertising will be allowed while there will be
restrictions, um, allowing up to 15 licensed platforms
to advertise, we believe directly
undermines harm minimization.
Um, we again look to the public health precedent set by,
um, with tobacco.
And tobacco is also tobacco advertising is completely banned
because evidence shows
that even restricted advertising normalizes
and expands use gambling advertising should
be treated no differently.
Having the registration icon
and audio marks on regulated products would be more than
enough for people to know which products,
which platform platforms are regulated.
The harm harm minimization is also framed as
individual responsibility, self-exclusion for examples, uh,
and complaints processes.
Rather than applying systematic regulation
license periods of up to eight years risks long-term
industry entrenchment.
Um, we're also concerned that
economic interests are prioritized.
The competitive license allocation means the main criteria,
uh, for industry is payment
and capital, not health or social wellbeing.
Outcomes allow also allowing payment via credit card
and buy now pay later schemes is beyond absurd.
This shows a profit over people orientation
that we've seen time and time again across many other
addictive, um, products and, um, industries.
This bill leans heavily on measures like individual
exclusions, self-identification, and complaints processes.
These are downstream solutions
that place responsibility on the person experience harm,
experiencing harm.
As the Public Health Advisory Committee has recently
reminded us in their determining our future report,
focusing on individual responsibility without structural
change will always fail.
Our people. Public health requirements
requires upstream act action, restricting access,
limiting advertising, redesigning harmful products,
and regulating industry power.
Expanding access to online casinos actively erodes
foundations to good health, creating only more debt, stress
and social dis social
and whanau disconnection in our communities.
The bill frames gambling as a consumer choice instead
of recognizing it as an engineered harm
that undermines protective environments
and gut guarantees that harm will continue, particularly
for Maori and other groups vulnerable to gambling harm.
Um, we just highlight five critical con concerns
with these, this bill, uh,
some which Jess has already spoken to.
So the increase in access 24 7 online casino
with rapid play cycles will drive higher rates
of gambling harm, uh, especially among Maori
who already carry the burden of harm
lowering the gambling age.
So allowing 18 year olds
to gamble in online casinos doesn't obviously align with,
um, what we have for in-person casinos in this country.
Um, we have to be 20, so it's exposing that,
that age group age of to, uh, the most addictive form
of gambling, uh, advertising we've already gone over
and ity obligations are ignored.
So why 1 9 0 9 showed us
that when harmful gambling products expand without
protections, Maori communities suffer disproportionately.
This bill risks repeating those breaches.
And finally, um, licensing doesn't fix exploitation.
So the gambling model itself is predatory.
It's designed to maximize losses.
Regulating the operators doesn't change that reality.
Uh, we use the committee to strengthen this bill
to genuinely protect au and prevent harm.
And specifically we recommend following six items.
Um, so mandatory harm prevention measures including spending
caps, state limits
and time limits, as well as, uh, limited operating hours,
uh, centralized spending controls.
So limits apply across all license sites.
Um, without this protections are meaningless
as people can simply move to another online casino.
Once a limit's hit, uh, a reduced number of licenses,
we just think 15 is excessive.
Um, and will further entrench gambling harm
the age limit?
We think it must match the land-based restrictions of 20.
That's indefensible to allow 18 year olds access
to the most addictive form of gambling.
When we don't allow it in physical casinos,
we urge totality based harm prevention,
including e equitable funding for COPA Maori services,
Maori governance input into regulatory oversight
and culturally relevant harm minimization strategies.
And we also recommend a nationwide centralized
self-exclusion system,
so mandatory across all licensed operators
to ensure hanau already experiencing harm are
protected across all sites.
Uh, in conclusion, our message is clear.
The bill in its current form expands gambling harm,
normalizes predatory products,
and prioritizes the industry profit over the
wellbeing of our people.
It fails to meet public health standards, fails
to meet ity obligations, will wreak havoc
and cause damage to our most underserved communities.
We have seen many overseas online casinos behave
with complete disregard for our laws here by continuing
to advertise currently,
and as well as paying influencers to promote their products
and target in particular Maori and Pacific.
Um, we, we don't think these behaviors will change just
because when we let them in the door, it's a sort
of letting the the wolf into the hen house.
So that's why these laws, this bill needs to be, um,
probably more prescriptive
and not leave it up to them to self-regulate.
Um, we have an opportunity here to put people over profit
and create a system that truly values
and works to protect our communities.
Anything question?
No. Just to reiterate that we have an opportunity here
to prevent years of harmful, uh, gen years
and generations of harmful, uh, addiction to prevent years
of whanau disconnection to prevent losing whanau to suicide,
to prevent lifetimes of debt.
We have instead the opportunity to protect the wellbeing
of people and to show that we are putting them
before the profit of industry.
We've, um, reached our time now, but, um,
our next, uh, submitter is,
um, Rishi, uh, from the Asian network
who are joining us by Zoom.
Good morning. Thank you so much
for joining us, um, by Zoom.
We've got a copy of your written submission
and we've got 10 minutes set aside
for your oral submission today.
Uh, so over to you,
RA. Thank you very much. Um,
may I allow to share my screen?
Yes, we can facilitate that.
I'll just check with our teams. Yep.
Should be good to share now.
Cool.
We can see that now. Thank you.
Uh, but I can't see
what you can see. Uh, are you,
We can, we can see a, a slide
that says online casino gambling bill.
It looks like the, the first slide in your
Slide. Yeah.
But, um, it is not visible to me, so I was wondering,
um, whether it has to
Be, it might be a, it might be on your end.
You might have to change your settings.
It's the advice I've been given.
Yep. Okay. What I'll do is,
um, all right. Or
You, or you could try turning off your camera
maybe, and then that might
Yeah.
See that might help. Mm-hmm.
Um, I'll stop sharing and I'll just do the share again.
Okay. All right. Screen two.
Okay. Addition
to patients, right?
Not sure. I can't see that. Nevermind.
Um, what I'll do is probably I'll just start presenting.
Um, and I would appreciate if someone can, um, um,
click the slides from the backend
because I'm unable to do that from this end.
Um, I'll stop share.
Um, I think the slides are already
with the team, um, as well.
And if you can, the team can upload it up from the
back, um, would be great.
Sorry about that. We tested that before.
It was working perfectly fine.
Okay. We'll just see if we can sort that out. Okay.
Um, my, uh, I think the best thing
that might be just if you start providing your oral,
we might be able to look at the slides, um, subsequently,
if we can't get them up on screen.
Apologize,
Kira. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Um, Kira Kto once again, um, uh, I am, uh,
the CEO for the Asian network,
and also the father of two young kids,
10-year-old and 14-year-old.
So this, um, submission is really, um,
not only professional, but very personal to me as well.
So thanks for giving us an opportunity to present today.
I want to start by explaining why the Asian voice
matters in the conversation.
Right now. The Asian communities make up about 17.3%
of New Zealand populations, um,
and it is expected to grow 26%,
and almost half of Auckland's population will be Asian
by 2043.
Um, but this is not just about numbers.
Um, it is about the harm people are experiencing
and will be experiencing, uh, in the future.
Uh, the Ministry of Health reports,
the Asian communities face the risk of severe gambling
that is 9.5 times higher than the other groups.
Oh, thank you. I think something is changing here, right?
Cool. Yeah. So we are on the slide two. Yep.
Thank you, Kira. Thank you very much.
And, uh, this is a serious issue,
and it is, um, one of, uh, which we cannot afford to ignore.
We know from experience
that many people are struggling in silence.
Language barriers, cultural stigma
and lack of appropriate services often stop
people from getting help.
Um, this is why, um,
we believe Asian voices need to be included.
When laws like this are being developed,
the people most affected must be part of the solution.
Um, so may, may I request you to flick the slide?
Yeah. Tani does not support the bill in its current state,
but, um, definitely
because it is not, um, reflecting the statutory objective
of harm minimization.
Um, currently, it allows, um, allows
licensed operators to advertise gambling,
which normalizes gambling
and increases harm, especially among vulnerable populations.
The bill also lacks the comprehensive, um, protection, um,
protections for vulnerable groups identified by the Ministry
of Health, including Maori Pacific Asian communities, youth,
and low income individuals.
Consumer protection, uh, measures needs to be stronger,
more accessible, and culturally appropriate
to the effective, um, to effectively support these groups.
Additionally, we emphasize the need for a thorough
and culturally appropriate consultation process
that includes lived experiences
and the linguistically accessible mechanisms in place.
Uh, can we go to the next slide, please?
Um, the harm minimization, um,
um, definitely the bill currently fails
to implement the core statutory objective
of harm minimization as well.
It does not reflect the best practice approaches used
internationally to protect vulnerable communities.
So communities most affected by gambling harm,
face increased risks without robust
and legally, uh, mandated safeguards that are enforced.
Bill and well-resourced.
Um, I will emphasize on well-resourced
because sometimes, uh, we have seen in the past, uh,
when the consultations, um, are done, then, um,
they're not well resourced at all.
Uh, without meaningful harm reduction measures,
the bill effectively expands advertising
and access to online gambling, exposing new
and vulnerable groups to harm.
Um, next, uh, slightly please.
Other, um, um, recommendations.
Um, at this stage, I want to highlight some
of the important recommendations today.
First, the harm minimization methods needs to be culturally
and linguistically appropriate.
Uh, this means all prospective measures,
including support services
and harm messaging, uh, must be accessible
to every community.
Special attention should be given to those most at risk.
I would like to, um, uh,
focus the attention on the less visible
Asian communities as well.
But in general, when the decision makers sit on the table,
we generally talk about broader Asian communities
like Chinese, Korean, Indians, but there are lots
and lots of other less visible Asian communities,
which are becoming very much visible these days.
For example, Nepalese community, Cambodian, Thai,
Vietnamese, and, and so on.
So these communities have grown, um, drastically in last,
um, probably three and a half years.
In New Zealand, for example, um,
the ESE community has grown, uh,
more than 127% in New Zealand.
Uh, next slide, please.
Um, uh,
they should be a government-led independent self-exclusion
resistor that includes all the licensed operators.
Materials for this register needs
to be available in the languages spoken
by the affected communities.
Again, um, when we say about the affected communities,
broader Asian communities, we are referring to finally,
the bill must require operators
to use government approved real-time monitoring tools
to detect early signs of gambling harm.
These signs might include increased spending or the,
or the can, um, canceled withdrawals.
When these early warning signs appear,
the operators should be required to take action such
as pausing, gambling, or reaching out
proactively to offer support.
Our experience shows that these behaviors are key indicators
and should be addressed quickly.
These recommendations are designed
to make protections stronger
and more accessible for our communities.
Continuing with the recommendation, it is important
that the banks also respond quickly when individuals ask
to block the gambling related transactions.
These should be an extra layer of security
that allows people to ask their banks.
We also believe the government agency is responsible
for gambling harm services should have a clear legal duty
to work together by sharing complaints, concerns
and ideas for improvement.
Um, having a standalone committee to look
after these kind of issues would be, uh, another kind
of a possible solution.
Uh, currently clause 30, uh, 42 bans credit,
but it does not fully protect vulnerable people.
Many individuals using credit cards buy now,
pay later options, or different payments are at a higher
risks because they may feel like they are
not using their own money.
Making sure these forms
of credit are excluded from the gambling
would strengthen the productions.
Um, next slide, please. Advertising.
Sure. I'll just, I'll let you know that we're almost out
of time and I think we've got a number of, um, slides left.
Oh, yeah. So I, I'll just Wanna, um,
Go for the, probably the solution, um,
recommendation for the headlines.
Um, as a father of 10 years old
and 14 years, I can clearly see the harm, uh, it may cause
to the young generations.
So the advertising needs to be strengthened
and a lot of, uh, recommendations are mentioned in, uh,
in regards to the advertising.
Um, and the presentation at there.
Um, I would like
to highlight on online gambling platforms increase harm
and this, uh, proportionately affect vulnerable groups,
our communities as well.
So we are particularly worried about non-licensed
overseas gambling sites.
Um, so how the government, um, can protect the overseas,
um, gambling sites coming to New Zealand.
Um, this is another kind of, uh,
the Asian communities do a lot of oversight
or, uh, overseas gambling websites they use
and how we can, uh, manage those ones.
This is another big issue within our communities.
Um, and, and,
and from our experience,
different Asian communities respond differently
to the regulations.
So the standardized approaches often miss out the less
Asian, uh, less visible Asian communities.
Therefore, we strongly recommend
that consultation includes the people
with li lived experiences,
and that as the key documents are translated
to overcome language barriers, conclusion,
we support the need of the regulations
around online gambling,
but this bill must be strengthened
to truly protect our communities, our families,
our children, and future for this nation.
So I'll just stop here,
but, um, open to any comments, suggestions,
or any questions from the panel. Thank,
Thank you so much for your time today
and also for preparing the slides.
And we'll make sure that we do circulate all the slides, uh,
to the rest of the committee as well.
Um, so we can have a good look at those.
We have actually, uh, run out of time
and I, I can't see any questions from my colleagues
'cause you've been so comprehensive.
So I'd just like to thank you for the preparation you put in
today for your written submission and for joining us. Thank
You. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much.
Thank you. Our next, uh, submitter is the North
Avon Christchurch, BMX Club who is joined,
and I, I think we've got Mark Lewis
who's joining us by Zoom.
Welcome Mark,
And thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Um, I've also got my, um, colleague, uh, Christina Freeman
with me, who's, uh, one of the coaches at the club
and also the key portfolio holder
for our funding efforts, um, as a team.
So thank you very much for the opportunity to speak today.
Um, so I'm the president of the North Island BMX Club,
and I'm here on behalf
of our members volunteers in the wider community.
We serve in East Christchurch.
Our club was founded in 1980 by a group of passionate locals
who wanted to give young people a safe, exciting place
to ride bikes, build skills, and grow.
Over the past 45 years,
we've become a cornerstone of our community.
Not just a sporting organization,
but a hub for connection, resilience, and pride.
After the Canterbury Earthquakes,
our community was deeply affected.
Infrastructure was damaged, families were displaced,
and antisocial behavior began to take root.
But through contestable community funding,
particularly from gaming machine proceeds, we rebuilt
and we didn't just restore what we lost,
we created something ordinary.
Over the past decade, our club has received approximately
$1.3 million in community grants, which have enabled us
to build and maintain two world class facilities in Bexley
Reserve, our BMX racing Track,
which was hosted regional national events
and will proudly hosted 2027 UCI Oceanic BMS Racing
Championships, a testament to its international standard
and the Nigel Mann Memorial Pump Track,
which hosted a UCI World Pump Track qualifier
and has received national recognition, including Merit
for Standing Project Recreation Ontario Rail Awards, uh,
in November, 2023,
and also winning the Beyond the Brief Placemaking RARA Award
in April, 2024.
These facilities are more than just places to ride.
They're safe, inclusive,
and accessible spaces that support youth development,
active recreation, and community connection.
They've become focal points for volunteering
and community spirit drawing in families
and supporters from across the region.
Importantly, pump tracks
and BMX are gateways to community, recreation
and structured sport for many young people.
These facilities are the first step into healthy activity,
community events, and a lifelong love of movement.
B MX is not only an Olympic sport in its own right where
ROA has achieved remarkable success,
but is also a proven feeder for other cycling disciplines,
mountain biking, track cycling, and road cycling.
New Zealand is renowned worldwide for its venous spirit,
outdoor lifestyle and commitment to wellbeing.
Our success across cycling disciplines on the world stage is
a reflection of these values.
By investing in grassroots facilities like ours,
we are not only nurturing future champions,
but also reinforcing New Zealand's reputation.
As a country where adventure, fun,
and health are part of our national identity,
our impact goes beyond infrastructure.
We've invested in safety
and compliance, including fencing, first aid, training,
and predictive equipment.
We've developed coaching programs
and trained volunteers to ensure our riders
and those who have just walked started to walk to adults.
So those who need to stay active, so continue to walk,
have the sport they need to thrive.
We've installed a modern electronic timing system,
including a fleet of transponders that can be used
by anyone wishing to get involved at no cost.
This dramatically increases access for new riders
and makes it easier for volunteers
to run large events efficiently and more often.
It's a game changer for participation
and for the sustainability of our volunteer lead model.
We've made active, active recreation and,
and sport accessible for families facing financial hardship,
keeping fees low, and removing barriers to participation.
For many young people, our club is their first experience
of structured sport, a place where they learn discipline,
confidence, and teamwork.
And we responded to real community needs.
In November, 2022, a fatal knife attack of a dog water
and Bexley Reserve highlighted the harmful
and un unwelcome behavior that was starting
to get entrenched in the area.
The council had long planned a pump track in the reserve
to increase positive activity and passive surveillance,
but lacked the funding and internal capability
and capacity to deliver it.
Our club stepped in partnering
with Christchurch city council community boards
and funders to build a new world class facility
that has shifted the balance in B Reserve from anti-social
behavior to pro-social engagement.
The pump track is now a busy hub
for active recreation year round.
It's accessible to all ages and abilities.
It's a place where kids ride safely, families gather,
and the community feels proud.
It's a space that has helped
transform the reserve into a destination
that promotes wellbeing and connection.
And we're not done yet.
We have big ideas for B Reserve plans
to further enhance access, safety, and participation.
We want to work in partnership with the council
and local community boards to deliver future projects
that won't get delivered otherwise.
But this is only possible through continued access
to sufficient contestable community funding.
We are not here today to debate the harms of gambling.
We all know gambling has serious downsides
and no one is denying denying the challenges it can create
for individuals and families.
But the reality is gambling will always be part of society.
Whether it's a pub, the casino
or online, no amount of legislation will make it disappear.
Attempts to ban or restrict it, simply drive risk,
driving it underground, or sending profits offshore
with no benefit to our communities.
What we can do and what we have done in New Zealand
for decades is ensure that some good comes from it.
Community funding source from gambling revenue has enabled
clubs like ours to deliver real positive outcomes,
safe spaces, healthy activities,
and opportunities for people of all ages
to find connection and purpose.
In our case, this funding hasn't just offset harm,
it's created something profoundly good.
Building community resilience and pride.
Taking away the opportunity for something positive
to come from gambling could be counterproductive, not just
for community groups facing financial pressures,
but even for those gambling struggling with gambling itself,
who may find new connection
and purpose through the very activities
this funding supports.
Without this funding our club
and many like us would face, uh, difficult decisions,
we'd risk losing the very programs
and facilities that keep young people
and communities engaged, active and safe.
We'd risk losing the momentum we built in the community
spirit that drives us.
So we respectfully asked you that
embed in the bill the principles from the Gambling Act 2003.
Gambling should benefit the community,
require online casino operators to continue to, uh,
to contribute a portion of revenue to community funding,
prioritizing youth and far now focus, recreation and sports.
Recognize community, recreation
and sport as an essential social infrastructure
support community.
Uh, support continue for existing programs
during any transition.
Our story is one of increased resilience, local partnership,
and positive impact.
Let's ensure that future generations can continue
to benefit from the power of community recreation
and sport nui.
Um, and we welcome any questions.
Thank you so much. Thank you for that, uh, mark for that,
um, comprehensive submission.
I don't have any questions. I'll
just check with my colleagues.
I think you've covered all the points for us.
Thank you so much, uh, for joining us today.
Thank you for the opportunity.
Thank you so much.
Thank you. We've, yeah.
So we've got a scheduled break now, so we'll, um, suspend
and then reconvene at 1215.
I didn't know whether I had to declare a conflict.
Was A BMX freestyler.